COMAVI: complex-aware structural mechanism profiles for prioritizing missense variants
Abstract
Pathogenicity scores rank which missense variants may be detrimental but generally do not identify the structural process affected or the experiment most likely to test it. COMAVI (COMplex-Aware Variant Impact scoring) scores each variant in the isolated protein and, where an assembly model exists, in the complex, reporting predicted changes in subunit stability, in stability on assembled coordinates, and in interaction energy per partner, alongside a structural-context tier. From that evidence it produces a priority score ranking modeled structural-disruption evidence, and a mechanism profile naming which process is disrupted, and therefore which experiment would test it.
We assembled a literature-curated benchmark of 61 variants across 14 protein systems in which every expected effect carries a written evidence basis and citation. Mechanism-pattern recovery, graded in 57 variants, was 41.0 of 57 (0.719) at the 2.5 kcal/mol reference threshold, against 0.561 for the strongest trivial strategy. In the 47 variants that also carry a structural-context tier, the priority score placed 16 of 17 variants with a modeled structural mechanism in the top 20, and all 17 in the top 25.
Because a mechanism call converts a continuous energy into a yes-or-no decision, every graded result depends on one threshold. Across the prespecified range, detecting that some axis was disrupted stayed nearly flat, while attributing it to the axis the literature implicates fell steadily and correct rejection of curated negatives rose. The three axes did not share an optimum, so one global threshold favors stability over interaction.
COMAVI is best used in two stages: the priority score to allocate experimental effort, then the mechanism profile to choose a stability, assembly, or binding experiment. A silent result means only that no lesion was detected in the supplied model at the stated threshold, not that pathogenicity is excluded.
Author Summary
Genetic testing routinely finds far more single-amino-acid changes in a person's proteins than any laboratory can study. Existing computer tools estimate which of those changes are likely to cause disease, but rarely say how a change does its damage which can help determine what experiment to run next.
Most proteins work while bound to partners. A change can therefore make the protein itself unstable, or leave it correctly folded but weaken how it holds onto a partner. Those two problems are tested in completely different ways in the laboratory. We built a method that evaluates the same change twice, once in the protein alone and once in the assembled group, so the two can be told apart.
We tested it on 61 changes across 14 protein systems for which published experiments already establish what goes wrong. Our method named the right kind of damage in roughly seven cases out of ten, and placed nearly every genuinely disruptive change near the top of a short candidate list.
1. Introduction
Improvements in sequencing technology and the falling cost of full genome sequencing have led to a growing abundance of sequencing data. Researchers have developed several strategies to filter this data for biologically meaningful insights including several variant effect predictors such as AlphaMissense and GPN-Star that use sequence- and evolution-based models to parse variants by predicted pathogenicity or functional constraint [1,2]. These variant effect prediction tools are incredibly useful; however, most do not give specific insight into the structural impact of evaluated variants. Similar scores can describe variants that destabilize a folded domain, weaken an interface, perturb an assembled subunit, or alter catalysis, and these possibilities prompt differing downstream experimental evaluation.
Additionally, many proteins function in complexes, and the structural context of a residue changes when partners assemble. A site exposed in an isolated chain may become buried in a complex; a substitution tolerated in the isolated subunit may destabilize the assembled model or weaken one partner interaction. Conversely, an interface substitution can change affinity while leaving the isolated fold intact. Experiments that measure folding and binding separately reveal distinct energetic and allosteric effects [3]. A method intended to evaluate the specific structural impact of a variant and guide experimental follow-up should preserve this monomer-versus-multimer distinction rather than collapse it into one impact score. Previously, evaluation of these multimer structural impacts was not feasible at scale due to technical limitations, but recently, structural modeling tools such as AlphaFold 3 and the Boltz series have substantially improved the accuracy of predicted complex structures [4-6].
To address the now closeable gap in multimer-aware structural impact prediction, we developed COMAVI. This pipeline compares variants across isolated and assembled structural contexts and translates the resulting evidence into predicted structural impact assessments and variant prioritization scores. We then curated a variant structural impact benchmark to evaluate whether the mechanism profiles recovered literature-supported structural effects and whether a fixed priority score could concentrate variants with modeled structural lesions near the top of a candidate list. The intention of the pipeline is to provide variant structural impact predictions with suggestions for subsequent assay-directed assessment.
Structural annotation tools now place variants in experimental and predicted structures [7-13], and two resources evaluate both the monomeric and the assembled context. ELASPIC classifies each substitution as a core or an interface mutation and predicts the corresponding quantity, folding stability for the former and binding affinity for the latter [14]. MAVISp computes folding and local-interaction free energies in separate modules and deposits them for more than a thousand proteins in a curated database [15]. In both cases a substitution is assigned to one structural context; neither computes the isolated subunit and the assembled complex for the same substitution and contrasts them. That contrast carries mechanism. A substitution that destabilizes the isolated subunit points toward a subunit less likely to reach its folded state, and therefore toward reduced abundance rather than a defective complex, whereas one that leaves the subunit intact and weakens a specific interaction points toward a protein that is present but fails to engage its partner. Which of those two the cell actually shows is not something COMAVI measures; the point is that the two predictions are distinguishable and imply different experiments. These imply different cellular consequences and different experiments - a stability or turnover assay in the first case, an affinity measurement against the named partner in the second - and a single energy value cannot tell them apart, because a residue buried in an interface can destabilize the fold without weakening the interaction. COMAVI computes both contexts for every variant, keeps the fold and binding predictions separate, and returns a per-variant mechanism call and priority score from coordinates and a variant list the user supplies. Related stability and interface methods provide complementary benchmarks and predictors [16-23]. Section 4.1 sets out in full what COMAVI shares with the closest existing framework and what it adds.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1 What COMAVI computes
COMAVI takes a missense variant plus isolated and assembled structural models and calculates three FoldX 5.1 energy changes: stability of the isolated subunit, stability calculated in the assembled complex, and interaction energy for each protein partner. Here, "stability calculated in the assembled complex" means the FoldX BuildModel mutation-induced folding-energy change computed using the assembled coordinates. The term names the structural context of the calculation, not a folding pathway: it does not assert that a subunit folds normally alone and is destabilized only once bound.
From these energies and an energy-free Tier 1-4 summary of local structural context, COMAVI returns two linked outputs (Fig 1). The priority score (ISDS-v1) combines energy magnitude and structural context to rank variants for follow-up. The mechanism profile retains the signed energy changes, tier, uncertainty, selected threshold, and model limitations needed to choose an experiment. Because the three energy changes can occur together, COMAVI does not force a variant into one mechanism label: a profile may support an isolated-fold effect, an assembled-complex effect, a binding effect, more than one of these, or no detected effect at the selected threshold. It is worth separating what the pipeline produces from what this evaluation adds. The pipeline's outputs are the three per-axis energies, the structural-context tier and the priority score, and none of them requires a decision threshold. A threshold enters only to convert those continuous energies into the discrete mechanism calls that can be graded against categorical literature labels, which is what this benchmark does; it is therefore an instrument of the evaluation rather than a parameter of the method, and a user running COMAVI on their own variants obtains the energies, the tier and the score without choosing one. Section 3.5 reports how much the graded results depend on that choice.
Fig 1. COMAVI prioritizes and localizes variant structural disruption. A missense variant and one or more structural models yield four lines of structural evidence: predicted change in isolated-subunit stability, in stability calculated on assembled coordinates, in partner-specific binding energy, and a structural-context tier summarizing substitution chemistry, contacts, interface status, burial and model confidence. All four contribute to both products. The three energies supply the energy component of the priority score and the signed values of the mechanism profile; the structural-context tier supplies the score's context component and, in the mechanism profile, selects between contact-driven and burial-driven descriptions of the same energetic call. The priority score ranks variants for structural follow-up. The mechanism profile localizes the disruption to an axis and indicates whether a stability, assembly or interaction experiment is the appropriate test. Pathogenicity evidence is not an input to either product and is compared against them only descriptively; the priority score is not a probability, and no binary cutoff on it is validated.
2.2 Benchmark populations and literature-defined expectations
The 61-variant literature-curated resource spans 14 protein systems: 13 multi-chain complexes contributing 49 interaction variants, and one single-chain system, the BRCA1 tandem BRCT domain, contributing 12 variants with measured isolated-subunit stability [24]. Systems were selected on three criteria, applied to the published mechanism and never to any COMAVI output. First, the mechanism had to be documented well enough to commit an expected direction on at least one modeled axis before scoring. Second, the set had to span the mechanisms the method claims to separate, so it includes loss-of-function and gain-of-function variants, fold-driven and binding-driven disruption, and variants whose published biology is ambiguous. Two panels were included specifically to satisfy that second criterion where the cohort would otherwise have left an axis untested. The BRCA1 tandem-BRCT panel supplies variants with directly measured isolated-subunit stability, of which only two exist elsewhere in the cohort. The VWF A1-GPIb alpha and complement factor H-C3b systems supply variants that weaken an interaction while leaving the fold intact; without them every binding-axis expectation would belong to a variant that also destabilizes its subunit, and the separation COMAVI exists to make - distinguishing a binding-interface lesion from fold destabilization at an interface - would never be tested on a case where the two come apart. Every committed expectation carries a one-line written evidence basis and a primary citation, recorded per variant and per axis in S1 Table (benchmark_variants sheet). Three nested populations are used and are reported explicitly throughout, because they answer different questions and have different denominators. All 61 variants receive COMAVI outputs. Of these, 57 carry a committed mechanism expectation and are graded; the four excluded are listed in S1 Table with the reason, which in every case is that the supplied structure cannot represent the relevant mechanism. Of those, 47 also carry a structural-context tier and form the prioritization subset. The positive class therefore differs between the two populations, and both counts appear in the Results: of the 57 graded variants, 25 carry a committed structural mechanism and 32 are curated to lack one, whereas of the 47 in the prioritization subset, 17 carry one and 30 do not. The 17 are a strict subset of the 25; the other eight are the monomer-only BRCA1 tandem-BRCT fold mechanisms, which have no partner chain and therefore no structural-context tier, so they cannot enter a prioritization analysis that ranks on one. Whole-variant mechanism-pattern recovery was evaluated in 57 variants: 47 interaction variants and 10 BRCA1 tandem-BRCT variants whose expected effect is on the stability of the isolated domain, either through burial of the substituted residue in the hydrophobic core or through direct disruption of the fold. Partner-dependent outputs do not apply to the monomer-only BRCT panel and were omitted rather than scored as negative. Four variants were excluded from whole-variant grading because the relevant mechanism was not represented by the supplied structure or was not sufficiently established in the literature. Table 1 gives the composition of the resource by system, and S1 Table (benchmark_variants sheet) lists every variant with its clinical annotation, its expected mechanism, and the published result that defined that expectation. That table cites the defining publication per variant; the primary literature underlying the curated expectations across the 14 systems is [25-43].
Structural prioritization was evaluated in the overlapping set of 47 interaction variants that had both a structural-context tier and a committed endpoint: 17 with a modeled structural mechanism and 30 curated to lack a lesion on the modeled COMAVI axes. Pathogenicity comparisons are reported on a fourth population, the clinically labeled complete-case subset, and they ask a different question: not whether COMAVI identified the right structural process, but whether a structural score orders variants the way a clinical label does. That is a separate claim with a separate ground truth, and Section 3.7 keeps it separate. The population, positive definition, and denominator are stated for each analysis and figure.
Table 1. Benchmark composition.
The same prespecified cohort of 61 missense variants across 14 protein systems is used for every analysis in this paper. Mechanism-gradeable counts the variants carrying a committed expected mechanism on at least one applicable axis; the monomer-only BRCA1 BRCT panel contributes no partner-dependent axis and therefore no structural-context tier. Clinically pathogenic is a clinical annotation, counted over every variant in the system and taken from the curated clinical record rather than from any structural evidence. It is deliberately on a different axis from the mechanism ground truth and is not used in any mechanism metric, so the two counts are independent and either can exceed the other. VHL-elongin C is the case where it does: all three variants are clinically pathogenic while two are mechanism-gradeable, because a variant can be pathogenic through a mechanism the supplied structure cannot represent. That independence is a premise of this paper rather than an inconsistency in the table, and Section 3.7 measures it. Per-variant detail, including the literature evidence that defined each expectation, is given in S1 Table (benchmark_variants sheet).
Primary literature defined the expected direction of each applicable energy calculation before COMAVI results were considered. Evidence was classified into five categories, referred to below and in the supplement as E1 to E5: quantitative energetic (E1), quantitative functional (E2), qualitative experimental (E3), population-supported (E4), and inferred (E5). Each expectation was additionally classified by how directly its evidence supported the structural effect. An inferred expectation (E5) was used where the literature established the mechanism firmly enough to imply a particular state on a modeled axis, but no assay had measured that axis directly. A variant shown to retain normal binding while losing catalytic activity, for example, implies a neutral binding axis without a binding energy ever having been measured. Absence of a dedicated assay on its own was never treated as evidence; without a published result that implies the axis state, the axis was left uncommitted. Unknown or inapplicable axes were omitted rather than treated as negative. S1 Table (evidence_composition sheet) gives the definitions and counts.
Evidence class is not independent of what the expectation asserts. A disruptive effect is more likely to attract a dedicated biophysical measurement than a normal one, and the ledger shows the consequence plainly: of the 38 axes supported by quantitative evidence (E1 or E2), 25 expect destabilization, whereas of the 60 supported by softer evidence (E3 to E5) only 8 do, and all 9 population-supported and all 18 inferred expectations are neutral. Restricting the benchmark to the best-evidenced expectations would therefore discard most of the negative class rather than raise the standard evenly, so all evidence categories were retained in the main benchmark and the restriction was run as a sensitivity analysis instead, reported in Section 3.2 and S1 Text. These sensitivity analyses did not fit evidence weights or retune tier boundaries. Population-supported and inferred neutral expectations were reported as such, not as measured neutrality.
2.2.1 Model scope: can the supplied structure represent the mechanism?
Before scoring a known mechanism, we asked whether the supplied structure contained the biological context needed for that mechanism to appear: the relevant partner, ligand, modification, oligomeric state, and conformation. This model-scope decision was made independently of COMAVI predictions. We assessed technical usability - residue mapping, structural confidence, and uncertainty - separately. For new variants without established mechanisms, the public pipeline reports the calculations and their technical usability but does not infer a literature-grounded mechanism or model-scope class. S1 Table (model_scope sheet) gives the framework.
When the required context was absent, a silent COMAVI result could not test the known mechanism. The isolated BRCA1 BRCT structure, for example, represents fold energetics but not phosphopeptide recognition by R1699L/Q. VHL Y98H lacks the relevant HIF-bound context, HBB E6V requires the deoxygenated polymerization state, and CALM1 N98S depends strongly on calcium-linked dynamics. These cases were treated as limitations of the supplied model rather than as negative structural evidence.
2.3 Structures and energy calculations
COMAVI scores a variant only in the context of a supplied multimeric model, so it applies to complexes whose composition and interaction partners are already known; it does not discover partners, and a mechanism that acts through a state absent from the supplied model is outside its scope rather than scored as absent. S1 Table (model_scope sheet) states the eligibility rules and the mechanisms they exclude. Complex structures were predicted with the AlphaFold 3 server [4]. Experimental structures replaced predicted models when the relevant site or interface lacked adequate confidence: 2HHB for hemoglobin, 6XI7 for KRAS-RAF1, and 1JM7 for BRCA1-BARD1. The BRCA1 tandem-BRCT monomer panel used 1JNX. All energy calculations used FoldX 5.1 [44] with default energy-function parameters. Each structure was repaired once with RepairPDB and reused across variants.
For each variant, BuildModel was run five times on the isolated subunit and on the assembled model. ΔΔG is reported as mutant minus wild type in kcal/mol, so positive values are destabilizing. The mean across replicates is the axis value, and the replicate standard deviation is retained. AnalyzeComplex was then applied to each FoldX-generated mutant complex to calculate interaction-energy changes for each partner. Summary outputs use the most disruptive partner, while partner-level values remain available. S1 Text provides the complete commands and implementation details.
BuildModel and AnalyzeComplex answer different questions. BuildModel estimates folding-energy changes for the chains and coordinates supplied to it; AnalyzeComplex estimates changes in inter-chain interaction energy. Calculating both prevents an interface-localized fold signal from being mislabeled as a binding-energy change and permits combined fold-plus-binding profiles when both axes fire.
2.4 Structural confidence and usable outputs
FoldX calculates ΔΔG from the supplied coordinates; pLDDT does not numerically rescale those energies. Instead, pLDDT determines whether an energetic axis from a predicted structure can support a mechanism call or enter the priority-score energy component, and it attenuates the structural-context tier. Sites with pLDDT ≥ 70 provide primary confidence. Values from 50 to <70 are retained as lower-confidence evidence when axis-specific uncertainty checks also pass. Below 50, the predicted-structure axis is not used as mechanism evidence, and that partner does not contribute contacts, interface occupancy, or burial. For the tier, the context score is multiplied by 0.7 for best-site pLDDT 50 to <70 and by 0.4 below 50; experimental structures bypass this attenuation. Monomer-fold output is not graded in regions without an independently stable monomeric fold.
2.5 Structural-context tier and priority score
The structural-context tier describes how strongly a site is embedded in features that may make it sensitive to substitution; it contains no FoldX energy and is not itself a mechanism call. It combines substitution severity, local contacts, interface occupancy, burial, and model confidence, then maps the fixed total to Tier 1 (strongest context) through Tier 4 (weakest). S1 Text gives the exact weights and cutoffs.
Because interface occupancy contributes directly to the tier, we tested how much it drove the result. On the same 47-variant prioritization subset, we compared the full tier with interface status alone and with the tier recalculated without its interface bonus. S2 Text, S3 Fig, and the within-system tests report these comparisons.
The same energy and context information produces the integrated structural-disruption score (ISDS-v1), hereafter the priority score. The formula is fixed: it uses the same reference values and tier mapping for every variant set rather than fitting coefficients or standardizing within the current batch. The score ranks the strength of modeled structural-disruption evidence. It is not a pathogenicity probability, does not identify the affected structural process, and has no validated binary cutoff.
For each usable energetic calculation j, COMAVI divides |ΔΔG_j| by a fixed reference value τ_j: 2.9 kcal/mol for isolated-subunit and assembled-complex stability and 3.5 kcal/mol for binding. These are the same numbers as the substitution-adjusted operating point of Section 3.5, because both are taken from the same published FoldX prediction intervals, but they are doing a different job here and nothing is excluded by them. τ_j is a divisor that puts three axes measured on different energy scales onto one comparable scale, not a cut-off: a calculation below τ_j contributes a ratio smaller than one rather than contributing nothing, so the priority score remains continuous and applies no threshold. The largest ratio, R, represents the strongest reliable energetic signal without adding correlated isolated and assembled stability effects.
R = max_j (|ΔΔG_j| / τ_j)
COMAVI softly compresses R so that one extreme FoldX prediction cannot dominate the ranking.
E = R / (1 + R)
The tier number T is converted to a context component C, mapping Tiers 1-4 to 1.000, 0.667, 0.333, and 0.
C = (4 - T) / 3
ISDS-v1 = (E + C) / 2
The final priority score gives equal weight to energy magnitude and structural context. Only confidence-passing energy calculations enter R, while the signed values and all available axes remain visible in the mechanism profile. All four tiers contribute continuously; the separate Tier 1-2 cutoff is used only in descriptive comparator analyses and is not part of ISDS-v1. Because the score does not use the threshold that converts a continuous energy into a mechanism call, it is unchanged when that threshold changes. A value above 0.5 is not a validated positive call.
2.6 Energy thresholds and descriptive evidence states
A continuous predicted energy becomes a yes-or-no mechanism call only after an energy threshold is chosen. The threshold is the minimum absolute ΔΔG required to call that axis positive at a given operating point. We evaluated uniform thresholds of 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 kcal/mol, plus one substitution-adjusted setting. That setting is not a single number: it takes a different value on each axis, because the reported uncertainty of a FoldX prediction depends on the substitution and on the quantity being predicted, and it is set to the upper bound of the published 95% prediction interval for each axis [45] - 2.9 kcal/mol for isolated-subunit stability, 2.9 for assembled-complex stability, and 3.5 for binding. It is therefore the most conservative point in the set: a call survives it only if the predicted effect exceeds what prediction error alone could produce. The released software uses 1.0 kcal/mol as a screening-oriented default. We use 2.5 kcal/mol as the frozen benchmark reference and the substitution-adjusted setting as the most conservative point evaluated. None is universally optimal.
Lower thresholds call more structural effects and are useful when missing a candidate mechanism is costly. Higher thresholds make fewer calls and are useful when false mechanistic assertions are more costly. Every report should therefore show both the continuous ΔΔG and the threshold used to call it.
We also combined energy calls and tier into four descriptive states - both positive, energy only, context only, or neither - to summarize evidence patterns without redefining the physical mechanism. One pattern in those states is worth stating here because it bears on how a single axis should be read. Across the 47-variant prioritization population, no variant with a modeled structural mechanism ever falls in the energy-only or the neither state, at either the 1.0 kcal/mol default or the 2.5 kcal/mol reference; 15 of the 17 are convergent at the reference and the remaining 2 are context-only. Energy without supporting structural context is, in this cohort, a no-lesion signature rather than a mechanism: 8 such variants at the default and 3 at the reference are curated to carry no lesion, and none is a real mechanism. That is a reason to read a firing energy axis together with the tier rather than on its own, and it is the empirical basis for combining them in the priority score. Definitions and the full state tables are in S2 Text.
2.7 Benchmark outcomes and statistical analysis
For each variant, we asked whether COMAVI recovered the expected combination of applicable structural effects. The reader-facing mechanism-pattern score is the mean of a three-level partial-credit grade: 1 for a fully consistent whole-variant pattern, 0.5 for a partly correct multi-axis pattern, and 0 for an inconsistent pattern. This outcome is formally weighted mechanism consistency; it is not ordinary exact-match accuracy. Unknown or inapplicable effects were omitted. Table 2 gives the full rubric.
Table 2. Whole-variant mechanism-pattern grading rubric.
To identify which calculations contributed, we also counted direction agreement separately for isolated-subunit stability, assembled-complex stability, and binding. Predicted-versus-measured analyses assessed rank correlation, scale compression, and the number of experimentally destabilizing effects recovered at each threshold. Continuity metrics and denominator audits are reported in S3 Text.
For structural prioritization, the positive class was the 17 variants with a modeled structural mechanism and the negative class was the 30 no-lesion variants in the 47-variant subset. Receiver operating characteristic area under the curve (ROC AUC) summarizes ordering across the full list: it is the probability that a randomly selected structural-mechanism variant ranks above a randomly selected no-lesion variant. Average precision summarizes precision across the recall curve. Top-k recovery asks how many of the 17 structural mechanisms would be encountered if a researcher could test only the first 10, 20, or 25 variants. Formula comparisons, score bands, and component analyses were treated as internal sensitivity analyses because the same resource informed score development.
Variants from the same protein system share structures and curation, so the main uncertainty analyses resampled whole systems rather than treating every variant as independent. We also examined leave-one-system-out results, variant-level bootstrap intervals, label permutations, and replicate noise. S1 Text lists the fixed seeds and draw counts.
2.8 Software, code, and data availability
FoldX 5.1 was used for energy calculations; Python with pandas, scipy, and scikit-learn was used for scoring and statistics. Code, reference outputs, figures, and regression tests are available at https://github.com/la424/comavi. The priority score is implemented once in the shared COMAVI engine, so benchmark, generic, and live or external runs receive the same versioned fields. FoldX and large structural-input collections are not redistributed.
3. Results
3.1 A COMAVI call scores the same substitution in the isolated subunit and in the assembly
Before any benchmark result can be read, it must be clear what a single COMAVI call contains. COMAVI evaluates the isolated subunit and, when an assembly is available, the assembled complex, then separates predicted changes in subunit stability from changes in partner interaction. Scoring the same substitution in both contexts is what allows a predicted folding problem to be distinguished from a predicted binding problem rather than reported as one undifferentiated effect. The priority score ranks candidates, whereas the mechanism profile retains the signed evidence needed to choose an experiment. Because the three energy changes are evaluated separately, one variant can support more than one structural hypothesis. Several quantities derived from these calls are reported below and are easy to conflate; Table 3 defines each one, names the population it is computed over, and gives its value at every decision threshold, and every later number is one of those quantities.
CFH R78G illustrates a binding-specific result: its predicted isolated-subunit change was modest (0.93 kcal/mol), whereas predicted binding disruption was 6.12 kcal/mol, consistent with an increase in the measured dissociation constant from approximately 12 μM to more than 35 μM [46]. VWF R1334Q shows the value of evaluating the assembled complex. Its isolated-subunit prediction was nearly neutral (0.01 kcal/mol), but assembled-complex stability and binding changed by 4.73 and 4.11 kcal/mol [47]. The profile therefore proposes a combined assembly-and-binding lesion rather than an isolated-fold lesion.
A silent result requires equal care, and it is not a benign call: COMAVI reports whether a modeled lesion was detected on the axes it can evaluate, and never returns a pathogenicity verdict. Two different situations produce silence, and they carry different meaning. The first is an in-scope variant with no lesion above threshold on any applicable axis, which is an informative negative for the mechanisms modeled. The second is a mechanism that acts through a state the supplied structure does not contain, where silence is uninformative rather than negative. HBB E6V is the clearest example of the second: it acts through deoxygenated hemoglobin polymerization, a state absent from the supplied model, so COMAVI silence there cannot test the known mechanism and instead redirects follow-up toward the missing assembly state. BRCA1 R1699L/Q and CALM1 N98S are related, involving phosphopeptide recognition and calcium-dependent dynamics. The eligibility screen in S1 Table (model_scope sheet) is what separates the two situations, and it is applied before scoring rather than after.
Table 3. Every reported metric, its population, and its value at each decision threshold.
Each metric is given across the whole prespecified threshold set rather than at the reference alone, because every graded quantity in this paper is a function of that choice and reporting one column would hide it; Fig 4 plots the same rows and S2 Table (threshold_sweep sheet) adds post hoc points beyond the prespecified range. The structural-prioritization ROC AUC is constant across the row because it is the one metric here that is threshold-free in both of its ingredients: the priority score is a continuous combination of energies and structural context that applies no cut-off, and the positive class is the curated mechanism class from the evidence ledger, not a thresholded call. Several quantities are reported as fractions of variants and are easy to conflate. Several quantities are reported as fractions of variants and are easy to conflate. Detection and attribution ask binary questions of the same 25 variants the structural arm grades, and attribution agrees with it to within 0.040. Measured destabilizations called is computed on a different population entirely - variant-axis pairs carrying a directly measured energy - and answers whether the predictor reproduces a measurement, not whether it recovers a curated mechanism. Reproduction is scored as a pair of threshold crossings rather than as numerical agreement: the 44 comparisons are those whose measured effect is at least 1.0 kcal/mol in absolute value, and a comparison counts as recovered when the predicted energy also reaches the threshold of that row. A prediction that gets the direction and the magnitude class right therefore counts, even if the two numbers differ.
3.2 COMAVI recovers the literature-defined mechanism in 0.719 of graded variants, against 0.561 for the strongest trivial strategy
This and every subsequent analysis use the same prespecified cohort of 61 variants across 14 protein systems described in Section 2.2 and listed in Table 1 and S1 Table (benchmark_variants sheet). Each variant carries a mechanism expectation taken from the primary literature rather than from any prediction, so the comparison is against an independently defined answer. At the 2.5 kcal/mol reference threshold, COMAVI recovered the expected combination of structural effects with a mechanism-pattern score of 41.0/57 = 0.719. Across the prespecified threshold set the same score runs 0.579, 0.649, 0.684, 0.719 and 0.711, so the reference is also its maximum on this cohort; Table 3 gives every metric in this paper at all five thresholds, Section 3.5 treats the choice of threshold directly, and the coincidence between the reference and the maximum is examined there rather than claimed as a selection criterion. This partial-credit result represents 41.0 total points across 57 graded variants, not 41 exact matches. The benchmark is close to balanced by construction, 32 variants curated to carry no lesion on the modeled axes against 25 with a committed structural mechanism, so this aggregate is close to a balanced measure: the unweighted mean of the two arms is 0.706, 0.013 below the weighted score. Both are reported because the cohort is not exactly balanced. To establish what that number is worth, every trivial fixed strategy was graded through the same rubric on the same variants. The strongest is to call every variant structurally silent, which scores 0.561 by taking the curated negatives and missing every mechanism; calling every variant destabilized on both fold subtypes and binding scores 0.386, and shuffling the ground truth gives 0.484 (standard deviation 0.052). COMAVI exceeds the strongest trivial strategy by 0.158. A single aggregate nonetheless averages two capabilities that a reader should see separately. Rubric performance was 0.600 on the 25 variants with a committed structural mechanism and 0.812 on the 32 curated to lack one. Resolving those arms into binary questions: among the 25 committed mechanisms, at least one of the three axes exceeded the reference threshold for 20 (detection, 0.800) and the axis to which the literature attributes the mechanism exceeded it for 14 (attribution, 0.560); among the 32 curated negatives, no axis exceeded it for 26 (correct rejection, 0.812). Binary attribution and the rubric restricted to the same 25 variants agree to within 0.040, so the partial credit the rubric awards is not inflating the structural arm. COMAVI therefore detects structural disruption more reliably than it localizes the disrupted axis, and the gap between those two rates is the method's principal current limitation. S2 Text reports the decomposition by expected mechanism class. The interaction and BRCT subsets had similar scores, so neither cohort determined the pooled result. Because the data span 14 clustered systems, 0.719 is benchmark-specific pattern agreement rather than universal accuracy.
At the output level, 58 of 77 applicable energetic calculations had the expected direction: 19/25 for isolated-subunit stability, 17/22 for stability calculated in the assembled complex, and 22/30 for binding. Fig 2 shows these axis-specific counts alongside the whole-variant partial-credit score, so that a reader can see whether the aggregate rests evenly on the three physical axes or is carried by one of them. The per-axis rates identify which calculations contributed, but they do not replace the whole-variant outcome.
Fig 2. COMAVI recovers literature-defined structural mechanism patterns in the current benchmark. Every value in both panels is at the 2.5 kcal/mol reference threshold; the same quantities across the whole threshold range are in Fig 4 and S2 Table (threshold_sweep sheet). (A) Direction agreement is shown separately for isolated-subunit stability (19/25), stability calculated in the assembled complex (17/22), binding (22/30), all energetic outputs (58/77), and the structural-context tier (34/47). (B) Whole-variant mechanism-pattern scores are shown for all 57 graded variants and for the interaction and BRCT subsets. A score of 1 is fully consistent, 0.5 is partly correct, and 0 is inconsistent; the primary mean is 41.0/57 = 0.719.
Evidence-restricted analyses did not change the qualitative conclusion. Among variants for which every committed axis had E1-E3 support, tier sensitivity was 1.000 (95% CI 0.753-1.000) and specificity 0.615 (0.316-0.861) on 13 structural and 13 no-lesion variants (n = 26); the direct-or-coupled subset returned the same values on the same 26 variants. Because evidence class was strongly tied to whether an axis was expected to be neutral or destabilizing, these analyses were treated as sensitivity views rather than alternative primary benchmarks (S1 Text). An independent check of the binding axis against measured interaction energies in SKEMPI 2.0 [56], outside the benchmark cohort entirely, is reported in S3 Text and shown in S2 Fig.
No single system carried the result. Resampling entire protein systems gave a 95% interval of 0.625-0.821 for the mechanism-pattern score, and leave-one-system-out values ranged from 0.704 to 0.750. Permutation, replicate-noise, and continuity audits are reported in S3 Text and shown in S1 Fig.
3.3 The priority score concentrates real mechanisms at the top of a ranking
A mechanism call that is usually right is only useful if it changes what a laboratory does next, which in practice means prioritizing candidates for follow-up. Two ingredients are available for that ordering, and it is worth establishing what each contributes before combining them. The structural-context tier, which uses no energy at all, placed all 17 variants with modeled structural mechanisms in Tier 1 or 2, but it also placed 13 of 30 no-lesion variants there. Complete recovery on seventeen variants at a specificity of 0.567 describes where the tier sits on the sensitivity-specificity tradeoff rather than showing it to be strong: a screen this permissive flags nearly half the negatives. Interface status alone was more specific at 0.767 and still recovered 15 of 17, whereas the full tier additionally recovered two structural variants that lie outside any detected interface. The exact comparator table and within-system tests are in S1 Table (context_comparators sheet) and S3 Fig.
The tier describes whether the mutated site lies in a structurally susceptible environment. It does not identify which energetic process is affected and should not override an axis-specific energy prediction.
We next asked whether combining energy magnitude and structural context, as the fixed priority score, moved variants with modeled structural lesions toward the top of a candidate list. This analysis used the overlapping set of 47 interaction variants with a committed structural endpoint: 17 structural-mechanism variants and 30 variants curated to lack a lesion on the modeled axes. The fixed priority score is defined in Methods.
The priority score placed 16 of 17 structural-mechanism variants in the top 20 and all 17 in the top 25. Across the complete 47-variant ranking, the structural-prioritization receiver operating characteristic area under the curve (ROC AUC) was 0.943 and average precision was 0.818; average precision is sensitive to how common the positive class is, so it should be read against this cohort's positive rate of 17/47 rather than compared across cohorts. The first is the probability that a randomly chosen structural-mechanism variant outranks a randomly chosen no-lesion variant, so 0.5 is chance and 1.0 is a perfect separation.
Fig 3 makes the practical consequence visible. Panel A shows how far the two classes separate on the score. Panel B reads the ranking from the top down and asks, at each depth, how many of the 17 structural mechanisms have been encountered: taking the top 10 ranked variants captures 9 of them, the top 20 captures 16, and the top 25 captures all 17. The curve therefore says how deep into the ranking a study would have to go to reach a given share of the real mechanisms. The soft-saturation transformation, component ROC curves, score bands, leave-one-system-out influence, and alternative fixed formulas are reported in S2 Text and S4 Fig.
Fig 3. The fixed priority score concentrates modeled structural mechanisms near the top of the ranking. (A) Priority-score distributions for the 17 structural-mechanism and 30 no-lesion variants in the 47-variant prioritization subset. (B) Cumulative recovery down the ranking: of the 17 structural mechanisms, 9 fall in the top 10 ranked variants, 16 in the top 20, and all 17 in the top 25. The x axis is rank depth, not a threshold. Panel values are at the 2.5 kcal/mol reference threshold, which enters only through the mechanism labels, not through the score itself. ISDS-v1 is an internal structural-prioritization index, not a pathogenicity probability or a validated binary classifier.
3.4 The ranking does not bury a resolved mechanism, but the cohort is too small to test agreement
Sections 3.2 and 3.3 report two different capabilities on overlapping populations, and reporting them separately leaves open the question that matters most in practice: whether they agree. A variant ranked highly but graded inconsistent would send a user to the right protein with the wrong experiment, which is the specific failure an interpretable prioritizer must avoid. Crossing the two over the 47-variant prioritization population answers the question only partly, and the reason is itself informative. Of the 17 variants with a modeled structural mechanism, 16 fall inside the top 20 and the one outside ranks 21st, immediately below the cut. There is therefore no substantial population outside the cut to contrast against: the mean rubric grade - the mean of the per-variant partial-credit score, scoring 1 for a fully consistent mechanism pattern, 0.5 for a partly correct one and 0 for an inconsistent one - is 0.594 inside against 0.500 outside, but the latter is a single variant, and the rank-grade association across all 17 is not significant (Spearman rho = 0.356, p = 0.161). The test is underpowered rather than negative, and it is underpowered because the ranking leaves almost nothing outside the cut. Both grades sit below the 0.719 whole-cohort score because they are computed within the structural class alone, where the mean grade is 0.588.
No variant graded fully consistent falls outside the top 20, so the ranking does not bury a variant whose mechanism COMAVI resolves. Within the top 20 the grades are 5 consistent, 9 partial and 2 inconsistent, and the two inconsistent cases - MLH1 R755W at rank 11 and PIK3CA E545K at rank 15 - are exactly the failure mode this analysis exists to expose: correctly prioritized, incorrectly explained. The only structural mechanism outside the cut is HBB W37Y at rank 21, and it is graded partial rather than inconsistent, so the ranking and the grading do not fail on disjoint variants. S3 Text reports the full crossing.
3.5 Stringency is paid for in attribution, not in detection, and the three axes disagree on the best threshold
COMAVI's outputs are continuous. The three per-axis energies, the structural-context tier and the priority score are all produced without reference to any threshold, and the prioritization results in Section 3.3 use none. A threshold enters only where continuous energies must be converted into the discrete mechanism calls that can be graded against categorical literature labels, so it is an instrument of this evaluation rather than a parameter of the pipeline. Every graded number in Sections 3.2 and 3.4 therefore depends on that single choice. This section reports how each of them changes across the whole prespecified threshold set, and only then explains why the reference point is the one carried through the rest of the paper. The threshold set was fixed before the graded ground truth existed in committed form: the five operating points have been unchanged since the repository's first commit, two months before the evidence ledger that defines the expectations was first committed. It is worth stating plainly that 2.5 kcal/mol also maximizes both the pooled mechanism-pattern score (0.719, against 0.579 at 1.0 and 0.711 at the substitution-adjusted setting, which is 2.9 kcal/mol for isolated-subunit and in-complex stability and 3.5 kcal/mol for binding) and its prevalence-balanced form. The substitution-adjusted setting is the most stringent point in the prespecified set; because it is defined per axis it is not a single number, which is why it appears at the right-hand end of every panel in Fig 4 rather than at a position on a continuous scale. That is a coincidence of this cohort rather than a selection criterion, and the bootstrap bands in Fig 4C overlap across the upper half of the range, so the reference point should be read as a defensible convention and not as a tuned optimum. Resolved into binary questions, the tradeoff is not the one a recovery-against-rejection plot implies. Detection is almost flat across the working range: at least one axis exceeds the threshold for 23 of the 25 committed mechanisms at 1.0 kcal/mol and for 20 at 1.5, 2.0 and 2.5 alike, falling to 18 only at the substitution-adjusted setting. What falls at every step is attribution: 19 of 25 at 1.0 kcal/mol, then 17, 16, 14 at the reference and 12 at the most conservative point. Correct rejection rises at every step over the same range: 5 of 32, then 19, 23, 26 and 27. Raising the threshold therefore buys rejection almost entirely at the expense of naming the right axis rather than at the expense of noticing a lesion at all, and the graded arms behave accordingly: the structural arm falls from 0.760 to 0.540 while the no-lesion arm rises from 0.438 to 0.844, crossing between 1.5 and 2.0 kcal/mol, above which the pooled score peaks (Fig 4A, Fig 4C). The three axes do not agree on where the optimum lies. Directional agreement on binding is highest at the lowest thresholds (24 of 30 at 1.0 and 1.5 kcal/mol) and falls at every subsequent step to 22 of 30 at the reference, whereas agreement on stability calculated in the complex gains most from stringency, rising from 12 of 22 to 17 of 22, and isolated-subunit agreement peaks at 2.0 to 2.5 kcal/mol (Fig 4B). All four per-axis denominators are constant across the range, so this is a property of the energies and not of changing eligibility. A single global threshold is therefore a compromise set where the two fold axes perform best, and the binding axis gives up 0.067 relative to its own optimum to accommodate them. This is a partial and correctable explanation for the interface shortfall reported in Section 3.2, and it identifies per-axis thresholds as the most promising single change to the calling layer. Table 4 gives the same tradeoff as a menu with a recommended reading for each setting.
Fig 4. Every graded metric as a function of the decision threshold. COMAVI's outputs are continuous; the threshold converts energies into discrete mechanism calls so they can be graded against categorical literature labels. The dashed line marks the 2.5 kcal/mol reference. (A) Binary resolution over the 25 committed structural mechanisms and 32 curated no-lesion variants: detection is any axis exceeding the threshold, attribution is the axis to which the literature attributes the mechanism exceeding it, and correct rejection is no axis exceeding it. Detection is flat from 1.5 to 2.5 kcal/mol while attribution falls at every step, so stringency is paid for in attribution rather than in detection. (B) Directional agreement for each physical axis separately, with each axis's own optimum ringed; denominators are constant across the range (25 isolated-subunit, 22 in-complex, 30 binding expectations). Binding peaks at the lowest thresholds and the in-complex axis at the reference, so no single global threshold suits all three. (C) The partial-credit mechanism-pattern score, pooled and split into its structural and no-lesion arms, with 95% bootstrap bands resampling all 14 protein systems. The arms cross between 1.5 and 2.0 kcal/mol and the pooled score peaks above that crossing, at the reference; the bands overlap across the upper half of the range. (D) Recovery of 44 independently measured destabilizing effects of at least 1 kcal/mol, which stringency costs faster than any graded quantity. Values above the substitution-adjusted setting are reported in S2 Table (threshold_sweep sheet) and are not part of the prespecified set.
Table 4. Energy-threshold menu and observed tradeoffs.
The structural arm is the mean rubric grade among the 25 variants with a committed structural mechanism; the rejection arm is the same grade among the 32 curated to lack a lesion on the modeled axes. Measured destabilizations called is a different population and a different question, counting how many of 44 variant-axis comparisons carrying a directly measured destabilizing energy have |predicted ΔΔG| at or above the stated threshold; Table 3 separates these.
The same tradeoff appeared in measured-energy comparisons. Of 44 experimentally destabilizing effects, 35 were detected at the 1.0 kcal/mol default, 13 at the 2.5 kcal/mol reference, and 12 at the substitution-adjusted setting. Thus a conservative threshold can miss a real effect even when the measured destabilization is large.
3.6 The predicted energies are anchored to direct measurements, and compress at large effect sizes
The threshold menu in Section 3.5 assumes the predicted energies it thresholds are meaningful quantities rather than an arbitrary scale, and that assumption is testable wherever the benchmark carries a directly measured energy for the same substitution. This section reports those comparisons, and they explain the shape of the tradeoff above: the predictor orders effects well but understates their size, so a threshold chosen on the measured scale is systematically too strict when applied to predictions.
The first comparison asks whether predicted and measured energies agree in rank and in size, and it separates those two questions because they have different consequences: a predictor that ranks correctly but compresses can still order candidates while misplacing any fixed threshold. Fig 5 shows both. FoldX preserved ordering better than magnitude: across the broader 56-point calibration set, predicted and measured effects had Spearman ρ = 0.63, but the fitted slope was 0.43 and error became more negative as measured effects increased. Large destabilizations were therefore systematically compressed, which explains part of the sensitivity loss at high thresholds.
Fig 5. FoldX ranks measured effects but compresses their magnitude. The pooled analysis contains 63 predicted-measured comparisons from four systems; fitted statistics exclude the prespecified barnase Glu73 force-field-failure cluster. (A) Predicted versus measured ΔΔG. (B) Prediction error becomes more negative as measured destabilization increases. (C) Only substantive energy disagreements are large; borderline cases occur near the 2.5 kcal/mol reference. The legend is placed outside the data region so all points remain visible.
Direct within-system measurements supported two axes: rank correlation was 0.72 for the BRCA1 isolated-subunit series and 0.90 for hemoglobin binding [24,48,49]. The present benchmark contains no direct measured energy comparator for the assembled-complex stability calculation, so that axis is evaluated against literature-defined direction and mechanism expectations rather than energy calibration. Fig 6 shows the two directly anchored axes.
Fig 6. Direct energy anchors for two COMAVI calculations. (A) Predicted isolated-subunit ΔΔG is compared with guanidinium-chloride unfolding free energies for the BRCA1 tandem-BRCT series (n = 10). (B) Predicted binding ΔΔG is compared with measured hemoglobin assembly energetics (n = 5). Every point in both panels is labeled. V1736A carries an additional annotation because it is the only variant in panel (A) whose measured unfolding energy exceeds the 2.5 kcal/mol reference threshold while its predicted value does not (measured 4.20, predicted 1.24), making it the single false negative at the operating threshold. No point in panel (B) is annotated that way: the largest measured penalty, W37E at 9.00 kcal/mol, is predicted at 5.14 and therefore called correctly, so the hemoglobin series under-estimates magnitude without inverting any call. Panel (B) also draws on the wider measured-energy calibration cohort rather than the 61 scored variants, which is why it includes W37A, W37E and W37G alongside the scored W37Y. Stability calculated in the assembled complex lacks a directly measured energy comparator in the present benchmark.
Together, these results support reporting the direction and rank of predicted energy, its continuous value, replicate uncertainty, and the selected threshold. They do not justify treating a FoldX ΔΔG as a measured energy or converting it to experimental units. The priority score remains continuous when the call threshold changes, so ranking and mechanism calling remain separate decisions.
3.7 COMAVI is not a pathogenicity classifier, and the two rankings answer different questions
The preceding sections establish what COMAVI recovers and how reliably, which invites a comparison it is important not to make: that a structural-disruption ranking is a pathogenicity predictor with extra steps. It is not, and the distinction is measurable. Pathogenicity prediction, structural prioritization, and mechanism interpretation answer different questions. On the common clinically labeled set of 47 variants, AlphaMissense was the stronger pathogenicity ranker (ROC AUC 0.903); the priority score had pathogenicity ROC AUC 0.851, its energy component 0.836, and its context component 0.769. These pathogenicity AUCs should not be compared directly with the priority score's structural-prioritization ROC AUC of 0.943 because the positive definition and task differ. AlphaMissense asks whether a variant may be pathogenic; the priority score asks how strongly the available structure supports modeled disruption; the mechanism profile identifies the proposed structural process and experiment.
Fig 7 separates the three views on the same variants, plotting structural context, predicted energy and priority score against the pathogenicity score so that agreement and disagreement are visible per variant rather than only in aggregate. Discordant cases show why all three views are useful. HBB E6V can be pathogenic despite a low structural score because its polymerization mechanism is absent from the supplied state. CFH R78G and VWF R1334Q show the converse: multimer-aware profiles identify binding-specific or combined assembly-and-binding hypotheses that a pathogenicity score cannot name. PIK3CA H1047R and TNNI3 R162W run the other way again: both sit in a strong structural context, yet neither produces an energetic lesion above threshold on any modeled axis. COMAVI therefore ranks them for follow-up on context alone and declines to name a mechanism, which is the intended behavior rather than a missed call - a high priority score is a claim about where to look, not a claim that a specific axis was disrupted. What makes these two informative is where the pathogenicity score sits on them. Both are clinically pathogenic, and both fall inside the AlphaMissense ambiguous band (0.538 and 0.411), as does CFH R78G (0.398); three of the four ambiguous variants in the cohort are the discordant cases named here. So on the variants where the pathogenicity score is least decided, the structural views are not uniformly more informative either: COMAVI supplies a named binding mechanism for R78G and, for H1047R and R162W, only a place to look. The three views do not resolve the same variants, which is the reason to read them together rather than to substitute one for another.
Fig 7. Pathogenicity ranking, structural prioritization, and mechanism interpretation are distinct. (A, B) AlphaMissense pathogenicity scores are compared with the priority score and with the strongest usable absolute predicted energy. Orange points are pathogenic or pathogenic gain-of-function variants; blue points are benign; the gray band marks the AlphaMissense ambiguous range. (C) Pathogenicity ROC AUCs on the common 47-variant complete-case population. These values answer a pathogenicity-ranking question and are distinct from the 0.943 structural-prioritization ROC AUC reported in Section 3.3. COMAVI scores remain structural descriptors, and the mechanism profile provides the process-specific interpretation.
Silent structural results occurred in both pathogenic and benign variants in this selected benchmark (S3 Text), so silence does not distinguish the two. That observation is the reason the transferable conclusion is asymmetric: a positive structural call supplies a testable hypothesis, whereas a silent call provides little evidence against pathogenicity, because the mechanism may simply lie outside what the supplied model can represent.
A practical COMAVI workflow has two steps. First, use the priority score to decide which variants deserve structural follow-up. Second, inspect the signed isolated-subunit, assembled-complex, and binding predictions, together with uncertainty, threshold, tier components, and model limitations, to choose the experiment. A high score without a thresholded energy call remains context-based prioritization rather than a named lesion.
4. Discussion
4.1 Two linked outputs answer two practical questions
COMAVI helps answer two practical questions: which variants deserve structural follow-up, and which experiment should test the predicted effect. At the 2.5 kcal/mol reference threshold, the mechanism profile recovered the expected structural pattern with a partial-credit score of 41.0/57 = 0.719, against 0.561 for the strongest trivial strategy. In the overlapping 47-variant prioritization subset, the priority score placed 16 of 17 modeled structural mechanisms within the top 20 candidates and all 17 within the top 25. This ranking result is threshold-free: the priority score applies no cut-off and the positive class comes from the curated mechanism class, so no part of it moves when the threshold changes. These results support mechanism-directed triage and prioritization within the present literature-curated resource.
The existing tool most like COMAVI is MAVISp. The underlying protocol is the same: FoldX5 BuildModel for stability and AnalyzeComplex for interaction energy, averaged over replicate runs. Reporting fold and binding effects as separate quantities is theirs as much as ours, as is the principle that a stability call is a statement about structure and not about function. They run a consensus of several energy predictors where COMAVI runs FoldX alone, and they cover over a thousand proteins and millions of variants against our 61. What COMAVI adds is narrow and specific. First, the isolated-versus-assembled fold contrast, which their framework does not compute: its stability module estimates folding energy on one selected structure per target and its local-interaction module treats interfaces, but the two are not run on the same substitution in both contexts and compared. ELASPIC likewise reaches both contexts while assigning each substitution to one of them, predicting folding stability for core mutations and binding affinity for interface mutations [14]. Second, an evaluation framework: mechanism attribution scored against literature-defined per-axis expectations, where their validation reports per-protein case narratives and predictor-style sensitivity and specificity against clinical labels. The two are also benchmarked against different quantities. MAVISp is assessed against functional assay readouts, reporting classification agreement with deep mutational scanning and activity data; its own report states that experimental protein-interaction data are too scarce and heterogeneous for reliable benchmarking of the binding module, and substitutes agreement among predictors there [15]. COMAVI is assessed against directly measured energies where the cohort carries them, which is feasible only because it is a small curated benchmark rather than a proteome-scale database. The two designs trade scale against the availability of a measured answer, and neither substitutes for the other. Third, a difference in how the two are used. MAVISp is a database, consulted through a web server or downloaded as tables, with new proteins entering by curation and public releases on a quarterly cycle; a user with a structure and a variant list of their own waits to be added. COMAVI is a pipeline that runs on supplied coordinates and a supplied variant list and returns per-axis energies, a mechanism call and a priority score for each one, which is the mode of use a laboratory triaging its own candidate variants needs. This work makes three contributions, and they are separable. The first is a distinction: COMAVI evaluates the same substitution in an isolated subunit and in the assembled complex, which can separate a predicted folding problem from a predicted partner-binding problem or identify both. The second is the benchmark itself, a cohort of 61 variants across 14 systems in which every committed expectation carries a written evidence basis, a citation, and a gate that enforces agreement between the two; it is usable independently of the method it was built to test. The third is measurement: where the cohort carries directly measured energies, the predictions are compared against them rather than against other predictions. CFH R78G and VWF R1334Q show how that decomposition maps to affinity or assembly experiments, whereas HBB E6V shows why a missing structural state must limit interpretation.
The priority score provides a transparent way to allocate limited experimental attention, but it cannot identify the affected process. The mechanism profile remains necessary for interpretation. The tier describes site context; it does not select a FoldX axis or override an axis-specific energy result.
4.2 How to use COMAVI: rank, interpret, and test
What a user receives per variant is the full per-axis record: signed predicted ΔΔG with its replicate spread for isolated-subunit stability, for stability in the assembled complex, and for interaction energy with each detected partner separately; the confidence status of the substituted site; the structural-context tier and its components; the mechanism call; and the priority score. The label is a reading of those numbers and never replaces them, so a user who disagrees with the threshold can re-read the same call at another one. S1 Table (benchmark_variants sheet) reports the graded call for every variant at all five thresholds, and 21 of the 57 graded variants change their call somewhere in that range. The threshold is an input to the grading, not an output of the pipeline, and the per-axis energies, the mechanism profile and the priority score are reported as continuous values from which a call at any threshold can be recomputed, and a user interested in one partner can look at that partner alone. S1 Table (benchmark_variants sheet) reports this record for every benchmark variant. Threshold choice should follow the cost of error. The 1.0 kcal/mol default is screening-oriented; 1.5-2.0 provides intermediate stringency; 2.5 is the frozen benchmark reference; and the substitution-adjusted setting is the most conservative point evaluated. Lower thresholds are preferable when missing a candidate mechanism is more costly, whereas higher thresholds are preferable when false structural assertions are more costly.
Every call should retain its continuous energy and threshold because near-boundary variants lose information when reduced to a binary label. A silent result must not be translated into benign, nonfunctional, or unworthy of study. It means only that the supplied static model did not show a structural lesion at the selected threshold.
COMAVI should be used alongside pathogenicity predictors, population evidence, functional assays, and clinical interpretation frameworks such as Franklin [50]. The practical sequence is simple: use the priority score to allocate attention, then use the signed mechanism profile and model limitations to design the experiment. Pathogenicity evidence remains a separate question. Reporting a pathogenicity score alongside the COMAVI outputs would be straightforward to implement, and the comparison in Section 3.7 shows what such a display would and would not add: the two disagree in interpretable ways, so showing them together is useful provided they are not combined into a single score, which would reintroduce the conflation the separation is designed to avoid.
4.3 Limitations and validation priorities
FoldX predictions preserve direction and rank better than absolute magnitude. This is a documented property of the force field rather than a feature of this benchmark: systematic evaluations against measured stability and affinity data report the same compression of large effects [15,46,47], and Section 3.6 reproduces it here with a regression slope of 0.43 against measured energies. Large destabilizations are therefore understated, so stringent thresholds can miss real effects and the priority score cannot be interpreted in experimental energy units. The score's compression of extreme predictions limits their influence but does not calibrate FoldX. A related caution applies at the other end of the scale. The thresholds in Table 4 are calibrated to separate curated mechanisms from curated negatives, and a variant below the reference threshold is reported as carrying no modeled lesion on that axis; it is not reported as having no effect. Modest predicted destabilizations can still be functionally consequential, particularly for proteins where a small shift in subunit stability or interface affinity changes assembly stoichiometry or turnover, and the measured-energy comparisons show that at the 2.5 reference the method reproduces only 13 of 44 directly measured destabilizing effects. A study concerned with mild but real perturbations should read the 1.0 kcal/mol row of Table 4, where 35 of 44 are reproduced, and accept the accompanying false-call rate.
The benchmark is small and clustered: 57 mechanism-evaluable variants span 14 systems, and variants within a system share structures and curation. Whole-system resampling addresses that dependence but cannot replace prospective validation. The priority-score formula and its initial evaluation used the same literature-curated resource, so the reported structural-prioritization ROC AUC and average precision are internal results that require testing without retuning. Evidence quality is also uneven: isolated-subunit stability and binding have direct energy anchors, whereas the present benchmark contains no direct measured energy comparator for stability calculated in the assembled complex.
Finally, COMAVI evaluates the supplied static coordinates. It cannot capture every catalytic, dynamic, aggregative, regulatory, post-translational, ligand-dependent, or state-dependent mechanism. Model limitations must therefore be assessed before a silent result is interpreted. Literature curation remains important, and detailed evidence is documented in the supplement and repository.
The highest-value next tests are external panels that separate folding from binding and include both disruptive and retained-function variants. Additional variants in the VWF A1-GPIb alpha and complement factor H-C3b systems can strengthen validation of fold-neutral binding lesions; SOD1, transthyretin, and dense PDZ, SH3, and GB1 landscapes can test coupled tertiary, quaternary, interface, and allosteric effects [3,51,52]. The priority-score formula is now frozen and should be evaluated on these systems without retuning. The current priority analysis is restricted to interaction variants because its structural-context tier was defined and evaluated in that setting. Extending a comparable tier and priority score to monomer-only systems would require a prespecified formula and prospective validation rather than reusing the current cut-points by assumption.
4.4 Conclusion
COMAVI converts a list of missense variants into two linked outputs: a fixed priority for structural follow-up and a mechanism profile that identifies the proposed structural process and experimental test. In this benchmark, it recovered useful mechanism patterns and concentrated modeled structural mechanisms near the top of the ranking. Its value lies in directing experiments, not replacing pathogenicity prediction. Responsible use requires the priority score, signed profile, selected threshold, structural context, and model limitations to be interpreted together.
Author contributions
[Author 1]: conceptualization, methodology, software, formal analysis, validation, data curation, visualization, writing - original draft. [Author 2]: [contribution]. S.M.W.: supervision, funding acquisition, conceptualization, writing - review and editing. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. CRediT roles remain placeholders pending finalization of the author list.
Funding
[Funding sources and grant numbers to be supplied before submission.] The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Ethics statement
This study required no human-subjects or animal-research approval. The benchmark comprises missense variants and biophysical measurements drawn from published literature and public variant databases; no new patient samples, identifiable human data, or animal experiments were generated or analyzed.
Code availability
The COMAVI pipeline, shared-engine ISDS-v1 implementation, analysis scripts, canonical benchmark, evidence ledger, versioned stress statistics, figure sources, public external-variant workflows, and verification suites are available under the MIT license at https://github.com/la424/comavi. The benchmark, congenital heart disease, generic, live, and Colab workflows use the same versioned scoring implementation on the main branch. A versioned archival release and verified software and concept DOIs should be added before final submission if they are created. FoldX 5.1 is third-party licensed software and is not redistributed; users provide their own licensed FoldX installation and structural inputs.
Data availability
The merged repository contains the 61-variant canonical resource in reference_outputs/scored_61var_canonical.csv; compact ISDS-v1 outputs in reference_outputs/isds_v1/; seeded stress-test summaries and raw draws in reference_outputs/stress_tests/; the frozen YAML and JSON analysis plans in analysis_plans/; source plotting data and scripts; publication figures and alt text in figures/isds_v1/; and SHA-256 manifests. The canonical table retains the literature-supported A636P correction and all nine versioned ISDS-v1 fields. Large AlphaFold structure collections and the FoldX executable are not redistributed. Any subsequently minted archive DOI should be added here before submission.
Acknowledgements
[Acknowledgements to be supplied before submission.]
References
1. Cheng J, Novati G, Pan J, et al. Accurate proteome-wide missense variant effect prediction with AlphaMissense. Science. 2023;381(6664):eadg7492. doi:10.1126/science.adg7492
2. Ye C, Benegas G, Albors C, et al. Predicting genome-wide functional constraints with GPN-Star. Nature. 2026. doi:10.1038/s41586-026-11005-5
3. Faure AJ, Domingo J, Schmiedel JM, Hidalgo-Carcedo C, Diss G, Lehner B. Mapping the energetic and allosteric landscapes of protein binding domains. Nature. 2022;604:175-183. doi:10.1038/s41586-022-04586-4
4. Abramson J, Adler J, Dunger J, et al. Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with AlphaFold 3. Nature. 2024;630(8016):493–500. doi:10.1038/s41586-024-07487-w
5. Wohlwend J, Corso G, Passaro S, et al. Boltz-1: democratizing biomolecular interaction modeling. bioRxiv. 2024. doi:10.1101/2024.11.19.624167
6. Passaro S, Corso G, Wohlwend J, et al. Boltz-2: towards accurate and efficient binding affinity prediction. bioRxiv. 2025. doi:10.1101/2025.06.14.659707
7. Arnaudi M, Utichi M, Tiberti M, Papaleo E. Predicting the structure-altering mechanisms of disease variants. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2025;91:102994. doi:10.1016/j.sbi.2025.102994
8. Khanna T, Hanna G, Sternberg MJE, David A. Missense3D-DB web catalogue: an atom-based analysis and repository of 4M human protein-coding genetic variants. Hum Genet. 2021;140(5):805–812. doi:10.1007/s00439-020-02246-z
9. Woodard J, Zhang C, Zhang Y. ADDRESS: a database of disease-associated human variants incorporating protein structure and folding stabilities. J Mol Biol. 2021;433(11):166840. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166840
10. Philipp M, Moth CW, Ristic N, Tiemann JKS, Seufert F, Panfilova A, et al. MutationExplorer: a webserver for mutation of proteins and 3D visualization of energetic impacts. Nucleic Acids Res. 2024;52(W1):W132–W139. doi:10.1093/nar/gkae301
11. Moth CW, Sheehan JH, Al Mamun A, Sivley RM, Gulsevin A, Rinker DC, et al. VUStruct: a compute pipeline for high throughput and personalized structural biology. PLoS Comput Biol. 2026;22(5):e1014183. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1014183
12. Kwon S, Safer J, Nguyen DT, Hoksza D, May P, Arbesfeld JA, et al. Genomics 2 Proteins portal: a resource and discovery tool for linking genetic screening outputs to protein sequences and structures. Nat Methods. 2024;21(10):1947–1957. doi:10.1038/s41592-024-02409-0
13. Stephenson JD, Totoo P, Burke DF, Jänes J, Beltrao P, Martin MJ. ProtVar: mapping and contextualizing human missense variation. Nucleic Acids Res. 2024;52(W1):W140–W147. doi:10.1093/nar/gkae413
14. Witvliet DK, Strokach A, Giraldo-Forero AF, Teyra J, Colak R, Kim PM. ELASPIC web-server: proteome-wide structure-based prediction of mutation effects on protein stability and binding affinity. Bioinformatics. 2016;32(10):1589-1591. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw031
15. Arnaudi M, Utichi M, Degn K, Tiberti M, Beltrame L, Krzesińska K, et al. MAVISp: a modular structure-based framework for protein variant effects. Protein Sci. 2026;35(5):e70548. doi:10.1002/pro.70548
16. Buß O, Rudat J, Ochsenreither K. FoldX as protein engineering tool: better than random based approaches? Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2018;16:25–33. doi:10.1016/j.csbj.2018.01.002
17. Rodrigues CHM, Myung Y, Pires DEV, Ascher DB. mCSM-PPI2: predicting the effects of mutations on protein–protein interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019;47(W1):W338–W344. doi:10.1093/nar/gkz383
18. Montanucci L, Capriotti E, Frank Y, Ben-Tal N, Fariselli P. DDGun: an untrained method for the prediction of protein stability changes upon single and multiple point variations. BMC Bioinformatics. 2019;20(Suppl 14):335. doi:10.1186/s12859-019-2923-1
19. Livesey BJ, Marsh JA. Using deep mutational scanning to benchmark variant effect predictors and identify disease mutations. Mol Syst Biol. 2020;16(7):e9380. doi:10.15252/msb.20199380
20. Blaabjerg LM, Kassem MM, Good LL, Jonsson N, Cagiada M, Johansson KE, et al. Rapid protein stability prediction using deep learning representations. eLife. 2023;12:e82593. doi:10.7554/eLife.82593
21. Arnaudi M, Utichi M, Beltrame L, et al. RosettaDDGPrediction for high-throughput mutational scans: from stability to binding. Protein Sci. 2023;32(1):e4527. doi:10.1002/pro.4527
22. Degn K, Utichi M, Besora Sánchez-Izquierdo P, Tiberti M, Papaleo E. In-silico stability predictors: investigation of performance towards balanced experimental data. bioRxiv. 2025. doi:10.1101/2025.03.28.645695
23. Vliora A, Tiberti M, Papaleo E. Evaluating FoldX 5.1 for MAVISp stability data collection. bioRxiv. 2026. doi:10.64898/2026.03.31.715598
24. Rowling PJE, Cook R, Itzhaki LS. Toward classification of BRCA1 missense variants using a biophysical approach. J Biol Chem. 2010;285(26):20080–20087. doi:10.1074/jbc.M109.088922
25. Clark KA, Yang QP, Weeks AM, et al. Comprehensive evaluation and efficient classification of BRCA1 RING domain missense substitutions. Am J Hum Genet. 2022;109(6):1153–1174. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.05.004
26. Starita LM, Young DL, Islam M, et al. Massively parallel functional analysis of BRCA1 RING domain variants. Genetics. 2015;200(2):413–422. doi:10.1534/genetics.115.175802
27. Crotti L, Johnson CN, Graf E, et al. Calmodulin mutations associated with recurrent cardiac arrest in infants. Circulation. 2013;127(9):1009–1017. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.001216
28. Hunter JC, Manandhar A, Carrasco MA, Gurbani D, Gondi S, Westover KD. Biochemical and structural analysis of common cancer-associated KRAS mutations. Mol Cancer Res. 2015;13(9):1325–1335. doi:10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0203
29. Kosinski J, Hinrichsen I, Bujnicki JM, Friedhoff P, Plotz G. Identification of Lynch syndrome mutations in the MLH1-PMS2 interface that disturb dimerization and mismatch repair. Hum Mutat. 2010;31(8):975–982. doi:10.1002/humu.21301
30. Raevaara TE, Korhonen MK, Lohi H, et al. Functional significance and clinical phenotype of nontruncating mismatch repair variants of MLH1. Gastroenterology. 2005;129(2):537–549. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2005.06.005
31. Drost M, Tiersma Y, Glubb D, et al. A functional assay-based procedure to classify mismatch repair gene variants in Lynch syndrome. Genet Med. 2019;21(7):1486–1496. doi:10.1038/s41436-018-0372-2
32. Ollila S, Sarantaus L, Kariola R, et al. Pathogenicity of MSH2 missense mutations is typically associated with impaired repair capability of the mutated protein. Gastroenterology. 2006;131(5):1408–1417. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2006.08.044
33. Ollila S, Dermadi Bebek D, Jiricny J, Nyström M. Mechanisms of pathogenicity in human MSH2 missense mutants. Hum Mutat. 2008;29(11):1355–1363. doi:10.1002/humu.20893
34. Jia X, Burugula BB, Chen V, et al. Massively parallel functional testing of MSH2 missense variants conferring Lynch syndrome risk. Am J Hum Genet. 2021;108(1):163–175. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.12.003
35. Zhao L, Vogt PK. Helical domain and kinase domain mutations in p110α of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase induce gain of function by different mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;105(7):2652–2657. doi:10.1073/pnas.0712169105
36. Mandelker D, Gabelli SB, Schmidt-Kittler O, et al. A frequent kinase domain mutation that changes the interaction between PI3Kα and the membrane. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009;106(40):16996–17001. doi:10.1073/pnas.0908444106
37. Jaiswal BS, Janakiraman V, Kljavin NM, et al. Somatic mutations in p85α promote tumorigenesis through class IA PI3K activation. Cancer Cell. 2009;16(6):463–474. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2009.10.016
38. De Bosscher K, Hill CS, Nicolás FJ. Molecular and functional consequences of Smad4 C-terminal missense mutations in colorectal tumour cells. Biochem J. 2004;379(Pt 1):209–216. doi:10.1042/bj20031886
39. Le Goff C, Mahaut C, Abhyankar A, et al. Mutations at a single codon in Mad homology 2 domain of SMAD4 cause Myhre syndrome. Nat Genet. 2011;44(1):85–88. doi:10.1038/ng.1016
40. Lanauze CB, Sehgal P, Hayer K, et al. Colorectal cancer-associated Smad4 R361 hotspot mutations boost Wnt/β-catenin signaling through enhanced Smad4-LEF1 binding. Mol Cancer Res. 2021;19(5):823–833. doi:10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-20-0721
41. Elliott K, Watkins H, Redwood CS. Altered regulatory properties of human cardiac troponin I mutants that cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Biol Chem. 2000;275(29):22069–22074. doi:10.1074/jbc.M002502200
42. Stebbins CE, Kaelin WG Jr, Pavletich NP. Structure of the VHL-ElonginC-ElonginB complex: implications for VHL tumor suppressor function. Science. 1999;284(5413):455–461. doi:10.1126/science.284.5413.455
43. Ohh M, Park CW, Ivan M, et al. Ubiquitination of hypoxia-inducible factor requires direct binding to the β-domain of the von Hippel-Lindau protein. Nat Cell Biol. 2000;2(7):423–427. doi:10.1038/35017054
44. Schymkowitz J, Borg J, Stricher F, Nys R, Rousseau F, Serrano L. The FoldX web server: an online force field. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005;33(Web Server issue):W382–W388. doi:10.1093/nar/gki387
45. Sapozhnikov Y, Patel JS, Ytreberg FM, Miller CR. Statistical modeling to quantify the uncertainty of FoldX-predicted protein folding and binding stability. BMC Bioinformatics. 2023;24:426. doi:10.1186/s12859-023-05537-0
46. Pechtl IC, Kavanagh D, McIntosh N, Harris CL, Barlow PN. Disease-associated N-terminal complement factor H mutations perturb cofactor and decay-accelerating activities. J Biol Chem. 2011;286(13):11082–11090. doi:10.1074/jbc.M110.211839
47. Tischer A, Machha VR, Rösner V, et al. Structure-resolved dynamics of type 2M von Willebrand disease. J Thromb Haemost. 2025;23(4):1215–1228. doi:10.1016/j.jtha.2024.12.026
48. Kwiatkowski LD, Hui HL, Wierzba A, et al. Preparation and kinetic characterization of a series of βW37 variants of human hemoglobin A: evidence for high-affinity T quaternary structures. Biochemistry. 1998;37(13):4325–4335. doi:10.1021/bi970866q
49. Bonaventura J, Riggs A. Hemoglobin Kansas, a human hemoglobin with a neutral amino acid substitution and an abnormal oxygen equilibrium. J Biol Chem. 1968;243(5):980–991. doi:10.1016/S0021-9258(18)93612-4
50. Franklin by Genoox. Genomic variant interpretation platform. Genoox Ltd. https://franklin.genoox.com (accessed 2026).
51. Vassall KA, Stathopulos PB, Rumfeldt JAO, Lepock JR, Meiering EM. Equilibrium thermodynamic analysis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-associated mutant apo Cu,Zn superoxide dismutases. Biochemistry. 2006;45(23):7366-7379. doi:10.1021/bi0600953
52. Hurshman Babbes AR, Powers ET, Kelly JW. Quantification of the thermodynamically linked quaternary and tertiary structural stabilities of transthyretin and its disease-associated variants: the relationship between stability and amyloidosis. Biochemistry. 2008;47(26):6969-6984. doi:10.1021/bi800636q
53. Grantham R. Amino acid difference formula to help explain protein evolution. Science. 1974;185(4154):862–864. doi:10.1126/science.185.4154.862
54. Abildgaard AB, Stein A, Nielsen SV, Schultz-Knudsen K, Papaleo E, Shrikhande A, et al. Computational and cellular studies reveal structural destabilization and degradation of MLH1 variants in Lynch syndrome. eLife. 2019;8:e49138. doi:10.7554/eLife.49138
55. Nielsen SV, Stein A, Dinitzen AB, Papaleo E, Tatham MH, Poulsen EG, et al. Predicting the impact of Lynch syndrome-causing missense mutations from structural calculations. PLoS Genet. 2017;13(4):e1006739. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1006739
56. Jankauskaitė J, Jiménez-García B, Dapkūnas J, Fernández-Recio J, Moal IH. SKEMPI 2.0: an updated benchmark of changes in protein–protein binding energy, kinetics and thermodynamics upon mutation. Bioinformatics. 2019;35(3):462–469. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty635
Supporting information
S1 Table. Benchmark cohort, evidence and comparator tables.
S2 Table. Operating points, evidence states and robustness tables.
S1 Text. Implementation details, statistical conventions and evidence provenance.
S2 Text. Sensitivity analyses, mechanism-class decomposition and operating-point diagnostics.
S3 Text. Pathogenicity comparison, robustness, independent validation and a self-caught ground-truth correction.
S1 Fig. Benchmark stress tests for whole-variant mechanism-pattern agreement.
S2 Fig. Independent binding-axis validation on SKEMPI 2.0.
S3 Fig. Structural-context comparator performance on the 47-variant population.
S4 Fig. Priority-score transformation and component ranking.
[TABLE 1]
System	Variant gene	Variants	Mechanism-gradeable	Clinically pathogenic	Structure	Model source
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	BRCA1	12	10	0	1JNX.pdb	Experimental
BRCA1-BARD1 RING heterodimer	BRCA1	4	4	2	1JM7.pdb	Experimental
Calmodulin-Ca(v)1.2 IQ domain	CALM1	3	3	3	fold_calm1_cacna1c_model_0.pdb	AlphaFold
Complement factor H-C3b	CFH	3	3	2	2WII_trim.pdb	Experimental
Hemoglobin alpha-beta dimer	HBB	1	1	1	2HHB.pdb	Experimental
Hemoglobin tetramer	HBB	5	5	5	2HHB.pdb	Experimental
KRAS-CRAF Ras-binding domain	KRAS	3	3	3	6XI7.pdb	Experimental
MLH1-PMS2 C-terminal heterodimer	MLH1/PMS2	7	7	3	fold_mlh1_pms2_model_0.pdb	AlphaFold
MSH2-MSH6 heterodimer	MSH2	5	5	3	fold_msh2_msh6_model_0.pdb	AlphaFold
PI3K p110alpha-p85alpha	PIK3CA/PIK3R1	5	5	4	fold_pik3ca_pik3r1_model_0.pdb	AlphaFold
SMAD4-SMAD3 MH2 complex	SMAD4	4	4	4	fold_smad4_smad3_model_0.pdb	AlphaFold
Troponin I-troponin C	TNNI3	4	3	3	fold_tnni3_tnnc1_model_0.pdb	AlphaFold
VHL-elongin C	VHL	3	2	3	fold_vhl_tceb1_model_0.pdb	AlphaFold
VWF A1-GPIb alpha	VWF	2	2	1	1SQ0.pdb	Experimental
[TABLE 2]
Decision condition	Grade	Score
Structure unusable, required biological context absent, expected mechanism not established, or applicable effects unavailable	Not applicable	Excluded
Variant curated to lack a lesion on the modeled axes, and COMAVI reports no modeled energy effect at the selected threshold	Consistent	1.0
All expected positive energy effects are recovered, with no unsupported effect and the correct direction	Consistent	1.0
All expected positive energy effects are recovered, but an additional effect expected to be neutral exceeds the threshold	Partial	0.5
For a variant with more than one expected effect, one expected positive effect is missed without an unsupported effect	Partial	0.5
The predicted energy change has the opposite direction from the expected effect	Inconsistent	0.0
A no-lesion variant receives a specific energy-effect call; a no-effect call misses an expected positive effect; or a missed effect is accompanied by a wrong-effect call	Inconsistent	0.0
[TABLE 3]
Name used in this paper	Population	What it counts	1.0	1.5	2.0	2.5 (reference)	2.9/2.9/3.5
Mechanism-pattern score (pooled)	57 graded variants	Partial-credit rubric grade averaged over every graded variant, both classes	0.579	0.649	0.684	0.719	0.711
structural arm	25 with a committed structural mechanism	The same rubric restricted to variants expected to carry a lesion	0.760	0.720	0.640	0.600	0.540
rejection arm	32 curated to carry no lesion on the modeled axes	The same rubric restricted to variants expected to be silent	0.438	0.594	0.719	0.812	0.844
Detection	25 with a committed structural mechanism	Fraction for which at least one of the three axes exceeds the threshold, regardless of which	23/25 = 0.920	20/25 = 0.800	20/25 = 0.800	20/25 = 0.800	18/25 = 0.720
Attribution	25 with a committed structural mechanism	Fraction for which the axis the literature attributes the mechanism to exceeds the threshold	19/25 = 0.760	17/25 = 0.680	16/25 = 0.640	14/25 = 0.560	12/25 = 0.480
Measured destabilizations called	44 variant-axis comparisons with a directly measured energy	Fraction of measured destabilizing effects that FoldX also calls at the threshold	35/44 = 0.795	26/44 = 0.591	19/44 = 0.432	13/44 = 0.295	12/44 = 0.273
Structural-prioritization ROC AUC	47-variant prioritization subset	Probability that a randomly chosen structural-mechanism variant outranks a randomly chosen no-lesion variant	0.943	0.943	0.943	0.943	0.943
[TABLE 4]
Energy threshold	Mechanism-pattern score, structural arm (n = 25)	Mechanism-pattern score, rejection arm (n = 32)	Measured destabilizations called (n = 44)	Recommended interpretation
1.0 kcal/mol	0.760	0.438	35/44 = 0.795	Screening default; use when missing a mechanism is more costly than extra follow-up.
1.5 kcal/mol	0.720	0.594	26/44 = 0.591	Lower-intermediate stringency.
2.0 kcal/mol	0.640	0.719	19/44 = 0.432	Upper-intermediate stringency.
2.5 kcal/mol	0.600	0.812	13/44 = 0.295	Frozen benchmark reference; relatively stringent, but not maximally conservative.
Substitution-adjusted 2.9/2.9/3.5	0.540	0.844	12/44 = 0.273	Most conservative setting evaluated; use when false mechanistic claims are especially costly.

[SI S1_Text]
S1 Text. Implementation details, statistical conventions and evidence provenance.
Consolidated for submission. Each section below appeared in the reviewed manuscript under the item name given in its heading.
S1 Text. Implementation details and statistical conventions
Each structural context was repaired once and cached. Variants were specified in FoldX notation. BuildModel was run five times on both isolated and assembled coordinates, and AnalyzeComplex was applied pairwise to each resulting mutant complex. Beyond the command, input, replicate count, partner chains, and output directory, no FoldX energy-function parameter was overridden.
foldx --command=RepairPDB --pdb=<structure> --output-dir=<workdir>
foldx --command=BuildModel --pdb=<repaired> --mutant-file=individual_list.txt --numberOfRuns=5 --output-dir=<workdir>
foldx --command=AnalyzeComplex --pdb=<mutant_complex> --analyzeComplexChains=<chainA>,<chainB> --output-dir=<workdir>
The mutant-minus-wild-type ΔΔG was read from FoldX outputs. Wild-type interaction energy was computed once per partner pair, and mutant interaction energy was computed on each of the five BuildModel replicates. Partner-level binding ΔΔG is the mean of IE(mutant) - IE(wild type); replicate standard deviation is retained.
Structural-context tier implementation. The raw score is Grantham substitution severity [53] multiplied by the sum of monomer contacts and the maximum confidence-passing inter-chain contact count, plus an interface bonus (1.5 for one partner; 2.0 for at least two) and a burial bonus (1.0 for partial burial; 2.0 for a buried core position). The result is multiplied by 1.0 for pLDDT at least 70, 0.7 for pLDDT 50-70, and 0.4 below 50; experimental structures bypass this attenuation. Fixed cutoffs assign Tier 1 at s at least 5.0, Tier 2 at 3.0 to less than 5.0, Tier 3 at 1.5 to less than 3.0, and Tier 4 below 1.5.
S2 Text. Evidence provenance and denominator sensitivity
The evidence ledger contains 98 committed energetic-axis expectations. E1-E3 expectations are supported by energetic, functional, or qualitative experiments. E4 denotes population-supported neutral expectations. E5 denotes an inferred axis state used when the literature supported a mechanistic or retained-function interpretation but no axis-specific assay was available; inference was not assigned from missing data alone. E4 and E5 commitments are heavily enriched for neutral expectations: all 9 E4 axes and all 18 E5 axes are neutral. Complex-context stability is the least independently grounded axis: 14 of its 25 committed axes rest on inferred rather than direct or coupled evidence, and 11 are E5 inferred axis states.
Using the all-row 78-axis convention, energetic-output agreement was 20/32 = 0.625 for E1-E2 evidence and 38/46 = 0.826 for E3-E5 evidence (Fisher p = 0.065). Evidence class was strongly associated with expected axis state: direct measurements were preferentially available for destabilizers, whereas frequency-supported and inferred commitments were predominantly neutral. Within expected-destabilizing axes, agreement was 14/24 for E1-E2 and 4/6 for E3-E5; within expected-neutral axes, the corresponding rates were 6/7 and 34/40. The continuity-corrected Mantel-Haenszel estimate across expected-state strata was odds ratio 0.83 (p = 0.92). Thus the current benchmark does not show that evidence category independently explains energetic-output agreement after expected axis state is considered. Among 25 gradeable E1 energetic axes, 18 agreed (0.720).
Strict variant-level sensitivity analyses used all-axis definitions. Requiring every committed axis to have E1-E3 support left n = 26, 13 structural and 13 no-lesion (tier sensitivity 1.000, 95% CI 0.753-1.000; specificity 0.615, 0.316-0.861). Requiring every committed axis to be direct or coupled left the same 26 variants and returned the same values. Complete recovery here rests on 13 positives, so the interval is wide; it is reported because the restriction is a sensitivity view of the full-tier screen, which recovers all 17 positives on the whole subset.

[SI S2_Text]
S2 Text. Sensitivity analyses, mechanism-class decomposition and operating-point diagnostics.
Consolidated for submission. Each section below appeared in the reviewed manuscript under the item name given in its heading.
S3 Text. Mechanism-class decomposition, fold-arm errors, and ground-truth conventions
Weighted mechanism consistency differed by expected mechanism class: 0.833 for mixed structural expectations (n = 6), 0.812 for curated structurally silent variants (n = 32), 0.550 for the fold-mechanism class (n = 10), and 0.500 for pure interface destabilization (n = 9). The interface class is therefore the weakest arm. Fold-arm errors separate into prediction misses and disagreements created by the sign-based ground-truth convention.
S4 Text. Operating-point and calibration diagnostics
The apparent pooled optimum depends on class mixture. The benchmark contains 25 variants with committed structural mechanisms and 32 benchmark negatives, a structural fraction of 0.439. Reweighting the classes moved the pooled optimum: 2.5 kcal/mol remained the pooled argmax only while the weight on the structural arm stayed at or below 0.645, well above the benchmark's own structural fraction, so the reference point is not an artifact of this cohort's class mixture, though it would move under a substantially more structural-heavy one. This analysis supports reporting a threshold menu rather than a universal optimum.
In 10,000 paired whole-system resamples, in which the same resample of the 14 systems is scored at every threshold, graded recovery decreased from 0.757 (95% CI 0.639-0.861) at 1.0 kcal/mol to 0.536 (0.405-0.679) at the substitution-adjusted setting, whereas correct rejection increased from 0.445 (0.270-0.625) to 0.849 (0.688-1.000). The probability that recovery fell was 0.999, and the probability that rejection rose was 1.000. The direction of the curves is forced by thresholding, however; resampling quantifies the size of the exchange, not its existence.
The mechanism-attribution menu also answers a different question from the 3 kcal/mol fold cutoff used for cellular-stability or degradation interpretation in MAVISp [15] and related MLH1 studies [54,55]. A predicted fold change below that cellular-abundance cutoff can still identify the correct structural axis for follow-up. We therefore retain the 3 kcal/mol comparison as endpoint context, not as a basis for selecting a COMAVI operating point.
S5 Text. Structural-context comparators, evidence states, and priority-score sensitivity
The full tier, an interface-only screen, and the tier without its interface bonus were compared on the same 47-variant prioritization subset (S4 Table; S3 Fig). The full tier recovered all 17 structural mechanisms (exact 95% CI 0.805-1.000) but also flagged 13 of 30 no-lesion variants, giving specificity 0.567 (95% CI 0.374-0.745). Complete recovery on seventeen variants is compatible with a true sensitivity as low as 0.805, so the interval rather than the point estimate is what the screen supports. Interface status alone recovered 15/17 and rejected 23/30; the no-interface tier recovered 14/17 and rejected 18/30. Exact within-system permutation p values were 0.0095, 0.0018, and 0.129, respectively. Per-tier structural fractions were 11/13 in Tier 1, 6/17 in Tier 2, and 0/17 across Tiers 3-4, so the gradient is now strictly decreasing and no variant with a modeled structural mechanism falls in the two weakest tiers. Removing the interface bonus demoted HBB W37Y, PIK3CA E542K, PIK3CA E545K, and CALM1 D96V from Tier 2 to Tier 3.

[SI S3_Text]
S3 Text. Pathogenicity comparison, robustness, independent validation and a self-caught ground-truth correction.
Consolidated for submission. Each section below appeared in the reviewed manuscript under the item name given in its heading.
S6 Text. Pathogenicity comparison, directional enrichment, and gain of function
At the 2.5 reference, 27 of 61 benchmark variants had at least one firing energetic output and 34 were silent, where firing uses the shipped reduction over confidence-passing axes rather than a raw threshold on every partner column. Among the 49 variants carrying a curated clinical annotation, 37 were pathogenic. All 22 annotated variants with a firing output were pathogenic, so no benign variant in this cohort produced one, whereas the silent group contained 15 pathogenic and 12 benign variants (Fisher exact p = 2.0 × 10^-4). The 15 pathogenic-but-silent variants spanned 10 of the 14 systems. Because the benchmark was selected for mechanism evidence, these fractions are not expected clinical predictive values; they establish only the direction of the asymmetry between positive and silent structural calls.
S7 Text. Robustness, uncertainty, and metric reconciliation
The versioned per-variant mechanism grades and output-level agreement fields are the authoritative source records. In the manuscript, structural agreement is described as a four-output continuity aggregate and is decomposed into the three energetic axes plus tier. The primary convention excludes the four ungraded scope or commitment cases from both whole-variant mechanism scoring and the continuity denominator, giving 92/124 = 0.742 at 2.5 and 90/124 = 0.726 at tSAP. The all-row denominator audit is 92/125 = 0.736 at 2.5. Naive recounts based only on raw ΔΔG sign or per-partner values do not reproduce the metric because the shipped scorer applies direction, operating-point, confidence, and interval gates.
Restricting the primary graded set to crystal or confident site models removes the seven partial-site variants. A636P remains in this sensitivity because it is a confident-site case, so its two newly committed neutral fold expectations still count as prediction disagreements. The restricted cohort scored 37.5/50 = 0.750 against 41.0/57 = 0.719 on the full graded set, a difference of 0.031. The confidence restriction therefore removes lower-confidence observations without turning the remaining cohort into a hidden high-performing subset; it should be read as a robustness view, not as an alternative benchmark definition. The two pLDDT thresholds operate together rather than as alternative configurations: a partner interface enters the gated set at 50, confidence is upgraded to high at 70, and the seven interfaces lying between those values are exactly the seven partial-site variants removed here.
S8 Text. Independent binding-axis validation on SKEMPI 2.0
The hemoglobin series provides a high-quality within-system anchor but does not test generalization across unrelated interfaces. We therefore scored two independent SKEMPI 2.0 complexes [56] with the frozen COMAVI workflow: barnase-barstar (24 substitutions) and TEM1-BLIP (24 substitutions on the unambiguously mapped BLIP side). Measured binding ΔΔG was calculated as RT ln(K_D,mut/K_D,wt).
S9 Text. Do high-priority variants also have their mechanism graded correctly?
The prioritization and mechanism-grading results answer different questions, and reporting them separately leaves open whether they agree: a variant ranked highly but graded inconsistent would point a user at the right variant with the wrong mechanistic hypothesis. Crossing the two over the 47-variant prioritization population answers the question only partly. Of the 17 variants with a modeled structural mechanism, 16 fall inside the top 20 and the one outside, HBB W37Y, ranks 21st and is graded partial. With a single variant beyond the cut there is no population to contrast against: the mean grade is 0.594 inside against 0.500 outside, and the rank-grade association across all 17 is not significant (Spearman rho = 0.356, p = 0.161). The test is underpowered because the ranking leaves almost nothing outside the cut, not because the two outputs disagree. Both grades sit below the 0.719 whole-cohort score because they are computed within the structural class alone, where the mean grade is 0.588; the whole-cohort figure also contains the curated negatives, on which COMAVI scores 0.812. What can be stated without a significance test is the property that matters operationally: no variant graded fully consistent falls outside the top 20, so the ranking does not bury a variant whose mechanism COMAVI resolves. Within the top 20 the grades are 5 consistent, 9 partial and 2 inconsistent; the two inconsistent cases are MLH1 R755W at rank 11 and PIK3CA E545K at rank 15, and they are the failure mode this analysis is designed to expose - correctly prioritized, incorrectly explained. Only one structural mechanism falls outside the top 20: HBB W37Y at rank 21, immediately below the cut, graded partial. Because a single variant sits beyond the cut, the inside-versus-outside contrast cannot be tested and the descriptive values should not be read as an association; what the crossing does establish is that no fully resolved mechanism is ranked below the cut. This is consistent rather than compounding.
S10 Text. A correction the benchmark caught in itself
Every committed expectation in this benchmark carries a written one-line evidence basis and a primary citation alongside its expected token. A shipped gate, scripts/verify_ledger_token_basis.py, reads each basis, keeps the clauses that carry the vocabulary of the axis being committed, and fails if the token asserts disruption where those clauses assert the axis is intact, or the reverse. It is run in continuous integration with the other audits.
Three of the 98 committed expectations failed that check, and all three were binding-axis tokens introduced by a single earlier curation review that changed them from neutral to destabilizing without changing the bases beside them. MSH2 C697F carried a destabilizing binding expectation against a basis reading "ATPase catalytic defect, protein stable, interaction intact". KRAS G12D and G12V carried destabilizing binding expectations against bases recording WT-like RAF1 binding with impaired GTP hydrolysis, and noting that residue 12 lies 13.6 A from the RAF1 interface. In each case the lesion is catalytic and the binding axis is not the axis it affects. The three tokens were returned to neutral and the three variants are now curated as carrying no lesion on the modeled axes.
The correction is reported rather than absorbed because its effects run in both directions. KRAS G12D and G12V move from graded inconsistent to graded consistent, and they are no longer counted among the variants the priority score fails to rank, which removes a limitation the earlier analysis stated. MSH2 C697F moves the other way: it is now a curated negative on which COMAVI predicts 13.3 kcal/mol of isolated-subunit destabilization at a buried-core residue, so it becomes a false positive, it lowers the rejection arm, and it is the one non-structural variant in the highest priority-score band. A correction that only improved the result would deserve more suspicion than this one.
The gate cannot detect every curation error. It reads one curated sentence per axis, so it catches contradictions that are written down; it cannot catch an expectation whose basis is silent on the axis, whose citation is wrong, or which is simply mistaken in a way the curator also wrote down. A passing gate means no committed token contradicts its own recorded evidence, which is weaker than every token being correct.

[SI S1_Table]
[SHEET index]
sheet	source item in the reviewed manuscript	caption
benchmark_variants	S1 Table	S1 Table. The 61 benchmark variants. Every variant scored in this paper, with the clinical annotation, the expected mechanism defined from primary literature before COMAVI results were considered, the structural-context tier, COMAVI's graded agreement at the 2.5 kcal/mol reference threshold, and the
evidence_composition	S2 Table	S2 Table. Evidence composition by category.
model_scope	S3 Table	S3 Table. Model-scope and mechanism-eligibility framework.
context_comparators	S4 Table	S4 Table. Structural-context comparator analyses on the same 47-variant population.
denominator_sensitivity	S5 Table	S5 Table. Denominator and eligibility sensitivity analyses.
fold_binding_disagreements	S6 Table	S6 Table. Directly measured or curated fold and binding disagreements at the 2.5 kcal/mol reference.
[SHEET benchmark_variants]
System	Gene	Variant	Clinical annotation	Expected mechanism	Structural tier	Agreement at 2.5	Agreement 1.0/1.5/2.0/2.5/SAP	Committed axes	Evidence class	Evidence basis	Citation	Pred ΔΔG subunit	Pred ΔΔG in complex	Pred ΔΔG binding	Measured ΔΔG	Structure
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	A1843P	-	Fold destabilization	-	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = +4.89 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	6.43	-	-	4.89	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	L1664P	-	Fold destabilization	-	inconsistent	X/X/X/X/X	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = +1.18 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	0.53	-	-	1.18	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	M1663K	-	No modeled lesion	-	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = -0.03 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	0.45	-	-	-0.03	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	M1783T	-	Fold destabilization	-	consistent	C/C/C/C/X	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = +3.73 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	2.86	-	-	3.73	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	P1806A	-	No modeled lesion	-	consistent	X/X/C/C/C	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = +0.06 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	1.67	-	-	0.06	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	R1699L	-	No modeled lesion	-	ungraded	-/-/-/-/-	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = -0.99 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	0.39	-	-	-0.99	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	R1699Q	-	No modeled lesion	-	ungraded	-/-/-/-/-	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = -1.83 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	1.77	-	-	-1.83	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	R1751Q	-	Fold destabilization	-	inconsistent	X/X/X/X/X	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = +1.57 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	0.73	-	-	1.57	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	V1665M	-	Fold destabilization	-	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = +2.22 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	2.98	-	-	2.22	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	V1736A	-	Fold destabilization	-	inconsistent	C/X/X/X/X	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = +4.20 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	1.24	-	-	4.20	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	V1808A	-	Fold destabilization	-	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = +2.40 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	3.57	-	-	2.40	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1 BRCT tandem domain (fold only)	brca1	Y1853C	-	Fold destabilization	-	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	monomer	E1	GdmCl equilibrium unfolding: measured ddG_U-F = +6.04 kcal/mol	Rowling, Cook & Itzhaki 2010 JBC 285:20080 (PMID 20452977; PMC2888420), Table S1	3.39	-	-	6.04	1JNX.pdb
BRCA1-BARD1 RING heterodimer	brca1	C61G	Pathogenic	Fold destabilization	Tier 1	partial	C/C/C/P/P	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E3	BARD1 binding preserved despite fold loss; RING heterodimer fold disrupted by Zn-coordination loss; C61 is a Zn-coordinating ligand; RING fold lost on Zn release	Brzovic 1998 JBC 273:7795 (PMID 9520298); Roehm & Berg 1997 Biochemistry 36:10240	2.33	6.78	1.00	-	1JM7.pdb
BRCA1-BARD1 RING heterodimer	brca1	E100Q	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 4	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E3/E5	WT-like BARD1 interaction by Y2H; No assembly-context stability measurement; token inferred from the intact monomer fold; No subunit-stability assay; token inferred from WT-like two-hybrid function	Starita 2015 (Y2H interaction panel)	-0.31	-0.16	1.00	-	1JM7.pdb
BRCA1-BARD1 RING heterodimer	brca1	K45R	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 3	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E3/E5	WT-like BARD1 interaction by Y2H; No assembly-context stability measurement; token inferred from the intact monomer fold; No subunit-stability assay; token inferred from WT-like two-hybrid function	Starita 2015 (Y2H interaction panel)	0.12	-0.26	1.00	-	1JM7.pdb
BRCA1-BARD1 RING heterodimer	brca1	V11G	Pathogenic	Interface disruption	Tier 1	partial	C/C/C/P/P	binding	E2	Moderate BARD1 binding loss by two-hybrid	Clark 2022 (mammalian two-hybrid)	1.45	3.29	2.31	-	1JM7.pdb
Calmodulin-Ca(v)1.2 IQ domain	calm1	D96V	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 2	consistent	X/X/C/C/C	none committed	-	Whole-variant expectation (no axis committed): CPVT/LQTS. EF-hand III Ca2+ site. Allosteric mechanism: Ca2+ binding disrupted but target engagement may persist. pLDDT=69.5.	see curation note	0.41	0.94	-1.84	-	fold_calm1_cacna1c_model_0.pdb
Calmodulin-Ca(v)1.2 IQ domain	calm1	F142L	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 1	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	none committed	-	Whole-variant expectation (no axis committed): C-terminal lobe LQTS. Near IQ motif contact. Crotti 2013.	see curation note	0.71	0.58	-0.51	-	fold_calm1_cacna1c_model_0.pdb
Calmodulin-Ca(v)1.2 IQ domain	calm1	N98S	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 4	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	none committed	-	Whole-variant expectation (no axis committed): Same EF-hand III site as D96V. Crotti 2013.	see curation note	0.0	0.27	1.00	-	fold_calm1_cacna1c_model_0.pdb
Complement factor H-C3b	cfh	I62V	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 2	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E1/E3/E5	SPR K_D 10-14 uM, WT-like; No assembly-context stability measurement; token inferred from the intact monomer fold; Natively folded by CD / thermal denaturation	Pechtl 2011 JBC 286:11082 (PMID 21270465), SPR	0.71	0.38	0.01	-	2WII_trim.pdb
Complement factor H-C3b	cfh	R53H	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 4	consistent	X/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E1/E3/E5	SPR K_D ~12 uM, comparable to WT; No assembly-context stability measurement; token inferred from the intact monomer fold; Natively folded by CD / thermal denaturation	Pechtl 2011 JBC 286:11082 (PMID 21270465), SPR	0.47	1.32	0.01	-	2WII_trim.pdb
Complement factor H-C3b	cfh	R78G	Pathogenic	Interface disruption	Tier 1	partial	P/P/P/P/P	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E1/E3/E5	SPR K_D > 35 uM (binding effectively abolished); No assembly-context stability measurement; token inferred from the intact monomer fold; Natively folded by CD / thermal denaturation	Pechtl 2011 JBC 286:11082 (PMID 21270465), SPR	0.93	4.88	6.12	-	2WII_trim.pdb
Hemoglobin alpha-beta dimer	hbb	E6V	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 3	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E3	HbS assembles normally -- pathogenicity arises from deoxy-state polymerization at a surface patch, not from alpha1-beta1 interface disruption; Native tetramer; assembly unaffected; Native beta-subunit fold; the lesion is intermolecular	Eaton & Hofrichter 1990 (HbS polymerization)	0.72	0.80	1.00	-	2HHB.pdb
Hemoglobin tetramer	hbb	N102T	Pathogenic	Fold and interface	Tier 1	partial	P/P/P/P/P	binding, fold_complex	E1	Hb Kansas: alpha1-beta2 H-bond loss, reduced tetramer assembly energy (~1.5 kcal/mol); Coupled reading of the same assembly measurement	Bonaventura & Riggs 1968 JBC (Hb Kansas)	-0.77	-0.43	1.00	1.50	2HHB.pdb
Hemoglobin tetramer	hbb	W37A	Pathogenic	Fold and interface	Tier 1	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex	E1	Equilibrium dimer->tetramer assembly ddG = +5.0 kcal/mol; Same assembly-energy measurement; the fold-in-complex token is a coupled reading of the assembly ddG, not an independent subunit-stability measurement	Kiger / Kwiatkowski Biochemistry 1998 (PMID 9521754 equilibrium assembly dG; PMID 9521753 kinetics)	1.82	6.16	4.53	5.00	2HHB.pdb
Hemoglobin tetramer	hbb	W37E	Pathogenic	Fold and interface	Tier 1	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex	E1	Equilibrium dimer->tetramer assembly ddG = +9.0 kcal/mol; Same assembly-energy measurement; the fold-in-complex token is a coupled reading of the assembly ddG, not an independent subunit-stability measurement	Kiger / Kwiatkowski Biochemistry 1998 (PMID 9521754 equilibrium assembly dG; PMID 9521753 kinetics)	0.68	5.88	5.14	9.00	2HHB.pdb
Hemoglobin tetramer	hbb	W37G	Pathogenic	Fold and interface	Tier 1	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex	E1	Equilibrium dimer->tetramer assembly ddG = +7.0 kcal/mol; Same assembly-energy measurement; the fold-in-complex token is a coupled reading of the assembly ddG, not an independent subunit-stability measurement	Kiger / Kwiatkowski Biochemistry 1998 (PMID 9521754 equilibrium assembly dG; PMID 9521753 kinetics)	2.41	7.76	5.45	7.00	2HHB.pdb
Hemoglobin tetramer	hbb	W37Y	Pathogenic	Fold and interface	Tier 2	partial	C/C/P/P/P	binding, fold_complex	E1	Equilibrium dimer->tetramer assembly ddG = +2.0 kcal/mol; Same assembly-energy measurement; the fold-in-complex token is a coupled reading of the assembly ddG, not an independent subunit-stability measurement	Kiger / Kwiatkowski Biochemistry 1998 (PMID 9521754 equilibrium assembly dG; PMID 9521753 kinetics)	0.22	2.85	1.60	2.00	2HHB.pdb
KRAS-CRAF RBD	kras	G12D	Pathogenic (gain of function)	No modeled lesion	Tier 3	consistent	X/X/X/C/C	binding	E3	WT-like RAF1 binding; impaired GTP hydrolysis. G12 is 13.6 A from RAF1	Hunter 2015	-0.12	-2.29	1.00	-	6XI7.pdb
KRAS-CRAF RBD	kras	G12V	Pathogenic (gain of function)	No modeled lesion	Tier 3	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding	E3	WT-like RAF1 binding; impaired GTP hydrolysis	Hunter 2015	0.43	-0.25	1.00	-	6XI7.pdb
KRAS-CRAF RBD	kras	Q61H	Pathogenic (gain of function)	No modeled lesion	Tier 4	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding	E3	Preserved RAF binding; switch-II hydrolysis defect. Q61 is 11.1 A from RAF1	Hunter 2015	0.7	0.12	1.00	-	6XI7.pdb
MLH1-PMS2 C-terminal heterodimer	pms2	G857A	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 2	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E4	gnomAD AF 28%; ClinVar BA1 stand-alone benign	gnomAD; ClinVar BA1	-0.8	-0.95	-0.00	-	fold_mlh1_pms2_model_0.pdb
MLH1-PMS2 C-terminal heterodimer	mlh1	H718Y	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 3	consistent	X/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex	E2/E5	Proficient MMR implies the MLH1-PMS2 interaction survived; No assembly-context stability measurement; token inferred from the intact monomer fold	Raevaara 2005 (MMR activity)	-0.83	-1.20	1.00	-	fold_mlh1_pms2_model_0.pdb
MLH1-PMS2 C-terminal heterodimer	mlh1	K618E	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 2	consistent	X/C/C/C/C	binding	E3	Non-damaging in functional assay	Drost 2019 (functional assay)	1.09	1.17	1.00	-	fold_mlh1_pms2_model_0.pdb
MLH1-PMS2 C-terminal heterodimer	mlh1	L749P	Pathogenic	Interface disruption	Tier 2	partial	C/C/P/P/P	binding	E2	PMS2 co-IP 30% of WT	Kosinski 2010 (PMS2 co-IP, MMR activity)	0.95	5.17	1.96	-	fold_mlh1_pms2_model_0.pdb
MLH1-PMS2 C-terminal heterodimer	mlh1	Q542L	Pathogenic	Interface disruption	Tier 1	partial	P/P/P/P/P	binding	E2	PMS2 co-IP 54% of WT	Kosinski 2010 (PMS2 co-IP, MMR activity)	-0.8	1.07	-0.39	-	fold_mlh1_pms2_model_0.pdb
MLH1-PMS2 C-terminal heterodimer	mlh1	R755W	Pathogenic	Fold destabilization	Tier 2	inconsistent	X/X/X/X/X	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E2	MAVE interaction score +0.617; PMS2 co-IP 82% -- binding preserved; MAVE abundance score -0.334: reduced cellular abundance	MAVE abundance/interaction scores; Kosinski 2010 co-IP	0.97	-0.94	-9.66	-	fold_mlh1_pms2_model_0.pdb
MLH1-PMS2 C-terminal heterodimer	mlh1	V384D	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 3	consistent	X/X/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E3/E5	Reclassified non-pathogenic; MMR-proficient; No assembly-context stability measurement; token inferred from the intact monomer fold; No subunit-stability assay; token inferred	InSiGHT expert-panel reclassification; rs63750447 AF ~8.9% EAS	-0.87	1.13	-1.56	-	fold_mlh1_pms2_model_0.pdb
MSH2-MSH6 heterodimer	msh2	A636P	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 3	inconsistent	X/X/X/X/X	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E3	MSH2-MSH6 interaction intact; ATPase mismatch binding/release defect; MSH2 expression/stability preserved; ATPase mismatch binding/release defect	Ollila 2008 Hum Mutat 29:1355 (PMID 18951462); Ollila 2006 Gastroenterology (PMID 17101317)	4.89	5.38	1.00	-	fold_msh2_msh6_model_0.pdb
MSH2-MSH6 heterodimer	msh2	C697F	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 1	inconsistent	X/X/X/X/X	binding	E3	ATPase catalytic defect, protein stable, interaction intact	Ollila 2008 Hum Mutat 29:1355 (PMID 18951462); Ollila 2006 Gastroenterology (PMID 17101317)	13.29	15.26	1.00	-	fold_msh2_msh6_model_0.pdb
MSH2-MSH6 heterodimer	msh2	G322D	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 4	consistent	X/X/X/C/C	binding	E3	MMR-proficient with interaction intact; gnomAD ~1.9%	Ollila 2008 Hum Mutat 29:1355 (PMID 18951462); Ollila 2006 Gastroenterology (PMID 17101317)	-0.09	2.04	1.00	-	fold_msh2_msh6_model_0.pdb
MSH2-MSH6 heterodimer	msh2	G674R	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 2	inconsistent	X/X/X/X/X	binding	E3	MSH6 binding preserved by co-IP; MMR lost via Walker-A ATPase defect	Jia 2021	3.99	2.89	1.00	-	fold_msh2_msh6_model_0.pdb
MSH2-MSH6 heterodimer	msh2	N127S	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 2	consistent	X/C/C/C/C	binding	E3	MSH6 IP, bandshift and MMR all WT-like	Ollila 2008 Hum Mutat 29:1355 (PMID 18951462); Ollila 2006 Gastroenterology (PMID 17101317)	1.48	-0.03	1.00	-	fold_msh2_msh6_model_0.pdb
PI3K p110alpha-p85alpha	pik3ca	E542K	Pathogenic (gain of function)	Interface disruption	Tier 2	partial	P/P/P/P/P	binding, monomer	E3/E5	Disrupts the nSH2 inhibitory contact, releasing autoinhibition; No subunit-stability assay; token inferred; helical-domain hotspot taken as fold-neutral	Zhao & Vogt 2008 PNAS	0.01	3.15	-0.62	-	fold_pik3ca_pik3r1_model_0.pdb
PI3K p110alpha-p85alpha	pik3ca	E545K	Pathogenic (gain of function)	Interface disruption	Tier 2	inconsistent	C/C/X/X/X	binding, monomer	E3/E5	Disrupts the nSH2 inhibitory contact, releasing autoinhibition; No subunit-stability assay; token inferred; helical-domain hotspot taken as fold-neutral	Zhao & Vogt 2008 PNAS	0.18	1.89	-4.63	-	fold_pik3ca_pik3r1_model_0.pdb
PI3K p110alpha-p85alpha	pik3ca	H1047R	Pathogenic (gain of function)	No modeled lesion	Tier 2	consistent	X/X/X/C/C	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E3/E5	Kinase C-lobe gain of function with p85 binding structurally unaffected; No assembly-context stability measurement; token inferred from the intact monomer fold; No subunit-stability assay; token inferred	Mandelker 2009	-1.59	2.32	1.00	-	fold_pik3ca_pik3r1_model_0.pdb
PI3K p110alpha-p85alpha	pik3r1	M326I	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 4	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E4	rs3730089, gnomAD MAF > 10%: benign by frequency alone	gnomAD (rs3730089)	0.43	0.26	1.00	-	fold_pik3ca_pik3r1_model_0.pdb
PI3K p110alpha-p85alpha	pik3r1	N564D	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 2	inconsistent	X/X/X/X/X	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E3/E5	Retains p110 binding, loses inhibition -- allosteric, not interface loss; No assembly-context stability measurement; token inferred from the intact monomer fold; No subunit-stability assay; token inferred	Wu / Jaiswal 2009	2.13	3.73	3.10	-	fold_pik3ca_pik3r1_model_0.pdb
SMAD4-SMAD3 MH2 complex	smad4	D351H	Pathogenic	Interface disruption	Tier 1	partial	P/P/P/P/P	binding	E3	Abolished phospho-Smad2/3 interaction by co-IP	De Bosscher 2004 (co-IP)	12.11	10.69	1.00	-	fold_smad4_smad3_model_0.pdb
SMAD4-SMAD3 MH2 complex	smad4	I500T	Pathogenic (gain of function)	No modeled lesion	Tier 2	consistent	X/X/C/C/C	none committed	-	Whole-variant expectation (no axis committed): LABEL CORRECTION. Myhre syndrome. Le Goff 2011: reduced ubiquitination → protein stabilization. Post-translational mechanism likely invisible to FoldX. Pipeline should call "no structural effect detected" — this is a correct structural call.	see curation note	1.62	0.75	1.00	-	fold_smad4_smad3_model_0.pdb
SMAD4-SMAD3 MH2 complex	smad4	I500V	Pathogenic (gain of function)	No modeled lesion	Tier 3	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	none committed	-	Whole-variant expectation (no axis committed): Same mechanism as I500T. Le Goff 2011.	see curation note	0.95	0.14	1.00	-	fold_smad4_smad3_model_0.pdb
SMAD4-SMAD3 MH2 complex	smad4	R361C	Pathogenic	Interface disruption	Tier 1	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding	E3	Completely abolished R-Smad interaction	Lanauze 2021 (co-IP)	2.75	7.43	3.61	-	fold_smad4_smad3_model_0.pdb
Troponin I-troponin C	tnni3	P82S	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 4	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E4	AF ~3% African-American: benign by frequency	Frazier 2008; gnomAD	0.66	0.47	1.00	-	fold_tnni3_tnnc1_model_0.pdb
Troponin I-troponin C	tnni3	R145G	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 3	inconsistent	X/X/X/X/X	binding	E2	EC50 1.4 uM vs 0.8 uM WT: reduced inhibitory potency, actin affinity unchanged -- interface retained	Elliott 2000 JBC 275:22069; Takahashi / Kimura 2001 (PMID 11735257)	2.03	3.69	0.76	-	fold_tnni3_tnnc1_model_0.pdb
Troponin I-troponin C	tnni3	R145Q	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 3	inconsistent	X/X/X/X/C	binding	E2	Same class as R145G: reduced inhibition, actin affinity unchanged	Kimura 2001 (PMID 11735257)	0.45	2.53	0.64	-	fold_tnni3_tnnc1_model_0.pdb
Troponin I-troponin C	tnni3	R162W	Pathogenic	Interface, magnitude uncommitted	Tier 2	ungraded	-/-/-/-/-	none committed	-	Whole-variant expectation (no axis committed): LABEL CORRECTION. Elliott 2000: INCREASED TnC affinity, disrupted regulation. Interface stabilization, not disruption. Pipeline should call PPI stabilization.	see curation note	0.92	1.32	0.04	-	fold_tnni3_tnnc1_model_0.pdb
VHL-elongin C	vhl	L158Q	Pathogenic	Fold and interface	Tier 2	consistent	C/C/C/C/P	binding, fold_complex	E3	Disrupts VCB complex assembly	Stebbins 1999 Science	-0.19	2.91	2.85	-	fold_vhl_tceb1_model_0.pdb
VHL-elongin C	vhl	W117R	Pathogenic	Not committed	Tier 1	ungraded	-/-/-/-/-	none committed	-	Whole-variant expectation (no axis committed): RECLASSIFIED mechanism_control. W117 in β-domain HIF-binding pocket, not ElonginC face. Fold destab + preserved ElonginC binding.	see curation note	4.11	4.46	1.00	-	fold_vhl_tceb1_model_0.pdb
VHL-elongin C	vhl	Y98H	Pathogenic	No modeled lesion	Tier 2	consistent	X/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex	E3	VCB assembly preserved while HIF binding is abolished (beta-domain HIF face, not the ElonginC face)	Ohh 2000	1.28	1.25	1.00	-	fold_vhl_tceb1_model_0.pdb
VWF A1-GPIb alpha	vwf	A1381T	Benign	No modeled lesion	Tier 2	consistent	C/C/C/C/C	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E1/E5	Binding-competent by SPR; No assembly-context stability measurement; token inferred from the intact monomer fold; Natively folded, WT-like Tm	Tischer / Moon-Tasson / Auton 2025 J Thromb Haemost 23(4):1215-1228 (PMID 39756657); CD/DSC + SPR + shear-flow	-0.1	-0.11	-0.00	-	1SQ0.pdb
VWF A1-GPIb alpha	vwf	R1334Q	Pathogenic	Interface disruption	Tier 1	partial	P/P/P/P/P	binding, fold_complex, monomer	E1/E5	GPIba binding lost by SPR and shear-flow adhesion; No assembly-context stability measurement; token inferred from the intact monomer fold; Natively folded with modestly reduced Tm -- below the destabilization threshold	Tischer / Moon-Tasson / Auton 2025 J Thromb Haemost 23(4):1215-1228 (PMID 39756657); CD/DSC + SPR + shear-flow	0.01	4.73	4.11	-	1SQ0.pdb
[SHEET evidence_composition]
Evidence category	Axes	Neutral	Destabilizing	Interpretation
E1 quantitative energetic	29	8	20	Direct or quantitative energetic evidence; includes one stabilizing expectation. One E1 monomer axis (BRCA1 R1699Q) carries a stabilizing rather than neutral or destabilizing expectation and is not shown in either column, so this row's Neutral and Destabilizing counts sum to 28 of 29.
E2 quantitative functional	9	4	5	Quantitative functional readout coupled to the axis.
E3 qualitative experimental	33	22	11	Qualitative experimental evidence; includes the two A636P neutral fold expectations.
E4 population frequency	9	9	0	Population-supported neutral expectations.
E5 inferred	18	18	0	Literature-supported axis state without an axis-specific assay; primarily neutral commitments.
[SHEET model_scope]
Class	Definition	Whole-variant treatment
Representable structural	Known lesion maps to one or more supplied COMAVI energetic outputs.	Grade the complete applicable-axis pattern.
Structural context missing	A required partner, ligand, modification, oligomer, or state is absent.	Exclude whole-variant mechanism grading; retain independently gradeable axes.
Nonstructural or static-invisible	Catalytic, regulatory, dynamic, aggregative, or post-translational mechanism outside static energetic outputs.	May be a committed benchmark negative only when literature supports the modeled axes.
Mechanistically uncommitted	Evidence does not establish a structural-versus-nonstructural pattern.	Exclude from whole-variant grading.
[SHEET context_comparators]
Screen	TP/FN	FP/TN	Sensitivity	Specificity	PPV	Balanced accuracy	Within-system p
Any pLDDT-passing interface	15/2	7/23	0.882	0.767	0.682	0.824	0.0018
Contact/severity + burial; no interface bonus	14/3	12/18	0.824	0.600	0.538	0.712	0.129
Full Tier 1-2 screen	17/0	13/17	1.000	0.567	0.567	0.783	0.0095
[SHEET denominator_sensitivity]
Analysis convention	Whole-variant score	Monomer fold	All energetic outputs	Four-output continuity aggregate
Primary 57-variant graded cohort	41.0/57 = 0.719	19/25 = 0.760	58/77 = 0.753	92/124 = 0.742
All-row output convention	Whole-variant exclusions retained	19/26 = 0.731	58/78 = 0.744	92/125 = 0.736
Include BRCA1 R1699L/Q in rubric-only sensitivity	43.0/59 = 0.729	Measured axes remain available	Not used as headline	Not used as headline
[SHEET fold_binding_disagreements]
Variant	Axis	Measured or curated expectation	Predicted ΔΔG (kcal/mol)	Interpretation
BRCA1 V1736A	Monomer fold	4.20	1.24	Genuine magnitude miss; false negative at 2.5.
MLH1 R755W	Monomer fold	Curated destabilizing	0.97	Genuine miss against the curated fold mechanism.
BRCA1 R1751Q	Monomer fold	1.57	0.73	Both values below 2.5; imperfect grade arises from sign-based ground truth.
BRCA1 L1664P	Monomer fold	1.18	0.53	Both values below 2.5; imperfect grade arises from sign-based ground truth.
HBB N102T	Binding	1.50	-0.14	Sub-threshold destabilization under the sign-based convention.
HBB W37Y	Binding	2.00	1.60	Sub-threshold destabilization under the sign-based convention.
MSH2 A636P	Monomer and complex-context fold	Neutral on both modeled fold axes	4.89 / 5.38	Literature-supported neutral expectations; false-positive fold signals. The mismatch-processing defect lies outside the modeled axes.

[SI S2_Table]
[SHEET index]
sheet	source item in the reviewed manuscript	caption
operating_point_sweep	S7 Table	S7 Table. Complete operating-point sweep. MC is weighted mechanism consistency; balanced MC gives structural and benchmark-negative classes equal weight.
disagreement_classes	S8 Table	S8 Table. Disagreement classes at the 2.5 kcal/mol operating point, excluding the barnase Glu73 cluster.
tier_distribution	S9 Table	S9 Table. Structural-mechanism distribution by tier.
evidence_states	S10 Table	S10 Table. Four evidence states across thresholds. Each cell is structural mechanism / no-lesion variant.
detection_metrics	S11 Table	S11 Table. Structural-mechanism detection metrics. Values are sensitivity / specificity / positive predictive value.
pathogenicity_ranking	S12 Table	S12 Table. Descriptive pathogenicity ranking on the common complete-case population.
robustness	S13 Table	S13 Table. Mechanism-pattern and four-output robustness analyses at the 2.5 kcal/mol reference.
skempi_validation	S14 Table	S14 Table. Independent binding-axis validation.
threshold_sweep	S15 Table	S15 Table. Every graded metric at every decision threshold, including post hoc points. The five rows above the rule are the prespecified set, unchanged since the repository's first commit and fixed before the graded ground truth existed in committed form; the three below it were evaluated after the 
[SHEET operating_point_sweep]
Operating point	Structural arm (n = 25)	Rejection arm (n = 32)	Pooled score (n = 57)	Balanced score	Measured destabilizations called (n = 44)
1.0 default	0.760	0.438	0.579	0.599	35/44
1.5	0.720	0.594	0.649	0.657	26/44
2.0	0.640	0.719	0.684	0.679	19/44
2.5 reference	0.600	0.812	0.719	0.706	13/44
tSAP	0.540	0.844	0.711	0.692	12/44
[SHEET disagreement_classes]
Call relationship	n	Definition	Median absolute error	Benchmark examples
Agreement	38	Measured and predicted calls agree.	0.67 kcal/mol	Most comparisons
Borderline disagreement	7	Calls straddle 2.5 kcal/mol but both values sit near it.	0.79 kcal/mol	V1665M
Substantive disagreement	11	Calls straddle 2.5 kcal/mol and at least one value is far from it.	2.96 kcal/mol	V1736A; V1808A
[SHEET tier_distribution]
Tier group	Structural mechanism	Benchmark negative	Structural fraction
Tier 1	11	2	11/13 = 0.846
Tier 2	6	11	6/17 = 0.353
Tiers 3-4	0	17	0/17 = 0.000
[SHEET evidence_states]
Operating point	Convergent	Energy-only	Context-only	Neither
1.0 default	16/9	0/8	1/4	0/9
1.5	15/6	0/6	2/7	0/11
2.0	15/4	0/5	2/9	0/12
2.5 reference	15/3	0/3	2/10	0/14
tSAP	11/3	0/2	6/10	0/15
[SHEET detection_metrics]
Operating point	Any energetic firing	Convergent: energy + Tier 1-2
1.0 default	0.941 / 0.433 / 0.485	0.941 / 0.700 / 0.640
1.5	0.882 / 0.600 / 0.556	0.882 / 0.800 / 0.714
2.0	0.882 / 0.700 / 0.625	0.882 / 0.867 / 0.789
2.5 reference	0.882 / 0.800 / 0.714	0.882 / 0.900 / 0.833
tSAP	0.647 / 0.833 / 0.688	0.647 / 0.900 / 0.786
[SHEET pathogenicity_ranking]
Descriptor	Pathogenicity AUC	Intended interpretation
AlphaMissense	0.903	Pathogenicity ranking
ISDS-v1	0.851	Integrated structural-disruption priority
ISDS energetic component	0.836	Energetic structural evidence
ISDS context component	0.769	Structural-context strength
[SHEET robustness]
Test	Weighted mechanism consistency	Four-output continuity aggregate
Observed at 2.5	0.719	0.742
Block-permutation null, n = 2,000	0.484 ± 0.052; p = 5 × 10^-4	0.535 ± 0.046; p = 5 × 10^-4
Leave one system out	0.7037-0.7500	0.7265-0.7589
Replicate noise, n = 500	0.721 ± 0.013	0.740 ± 0.004
Variant bootstrap, n = 2,000	95% CI 0.614-0.819	95% CI 0.664-0.820
System-cluster bootstrap, n = 2,000	95% CI 0.625-0.821	95% CI 0.682-0.816
[SHEET skempi_validation]
Complex	Methods	n	Pearson r	Spearman ρ	Sign-correct on destabilizers
Barnase-barstar, all	ITC 10; stopped-flow 9; inactivation 5	24	0.37 (p = 0.074)	0.30 (p = 0.156)	14/22 (64%)
Barnase-barstar, excluding Glu73	stopped-flow 9; inactivation 5; ITC 3	17	0.51 (p = 0.035)	0.56 (p = 0.019)	14/15 (93%)
TEM1-BLIP, BLIP side	ITC 17; stopped-flow 5; SPR 1; inactivation 1	24	0.51 (p = 0.010)	0.50 (p = 0.012)	16/18 (89%)
Combined, excluding Glu73 cluster	mixed	41	0.48 (p = 0.002)	0.55 (p = 0.0002)	30/33 (91%)
[SHEET threshold_sweep]
Threshold (kcal/mol)	Detection	Attribution	Correct rejection	Whole-variant score	Axis: isolated subunit	Axis: in complex	Axis: binding	Structural agreement
1.0	0.920	0.760	0.156	0.579	0.720	0.545	0.800	0.710
1.5	0.800	0.680	0.594	0.649	0.680	0.727	0.800	0.734
2.0	0.800	0.640	0.719	0.684	0.760	0.727	0.767	0.742
2.5 (reference)	0.800	0.560	0.812	0.719	0.760	0.773	0.733	0.742
2.9/2.9/3.5	0.720	0.480	0.844	0.711	0.720	0.727	0.733	0.726
3.0 (post hoc)	0.640	0.400	0.844	-	0.680	0.682	0.700	0.702
3.5 (post hoc)	0.520	0.360	0.844	-	0.640	0.682	0.733	0.702
4.0 (post hoc)	0.480	0.280	0.938	-	0.600	0.727	0.700	0.694
